Julia Fiona Roberts ( born October 28 , 1967 ) is an American actress and producer .
She established herself as a leading lady in Hollywood after headlining the romantic comedy film Pretty Woman ( 1990 ) , which grossed 464 million worldwide .
She has won three Golden Globe Awards , from eight nominations , and has been nominated for four Academy Awards for her film acting , winning the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in Erin Brockovich ( 2000 ) .
Her films have collectively brought box office receipts of over billion , making her one of the most bankable actresses in Hollywood .
Her most successful films include Mystic Pizza ( 1988 ) , Steel Magnolias ( 1989 ) , Pretty Woman ( 1990 ) , Sleeping with the Enemy ( 1991 ) , The Pelican Brief ( 1993 ) , My Best Friend Wedding ( 1997 ) , Notting Hill ( 1999 ) , Runaway Bride ( 1999 ) , Erin Brockovich ( 2000 ) , Ocean Eleven ( 2001 ) , Ocean Twelve ( 2004 ) , Charlie Wilson War ( 2007 ) , Valentine Day ( 2010 ) , Eat Pray Love ( 2010 ) , Money Monster ( 2016 ) , and Wonder ( 2017 ) .
Roberts was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for her performance in the HBO television film The Normal Heart ( 2014 ) .
In 2018 , she starred in the Prime Video psychological thriller series Homecoming .
Roberts was the actress in the world throughout most of the 1990s and in the first half of the 2000s .
Her fee for 1990 Pretty Woman was ; in 2003 , she was paid an unprecedented 25 million for her role in Mona Lisa Smile ( 2003 ) .
As of 2017 , Roberts net worth was estimated to be 170 million .
People magazine has named her the most beautiful woman in the world a record five times .
== Early life and family ==
Roberts was born on October 28 , 1967 , in Smyrna , Georgia , to Betty Lou Bredemus and Walter Grady Roberts .
She is of English , Scottish , Irish , Welsh , German , and Swedish descent .
Her father was a Baptist , her mother a Catholic , and she was raised Catholic .
Her older brother Eric Roberts ( b .
1956 ) , from whom she was estranged for several years until 2004 , older sister Lisa Roberts Gillan ( b .
1965 ) , and niece Emma Roberts , are also actors .
She also had a younger named Nancy Motes .
Roberts parents , actors and playwrights , met while performing in theatrical productions for the armed forces .
They later the Atlanta Actors and Writers Workshop in Atlanta , off Juniper Street in Midtown .
They ran a children acting school in Decatur , Georgia , while they were expecting Julia .
The children of Coretta and Martin Luther King attended the school ; Walter Roberts served as acting coach for their daughter , Yolanda .
As a for his service , King paid Roberts hospital bill when Julia was parents married in 1955 .
Her mother filed for divorce in 1971 ; the divorce was finalized in early 1972 .
From 1972 , Roberts lived in Smyrna , Georgia , where she attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School , Griffin Middle School , and Campbell High School .
In 1972 , her mother married Michael Motes , who was abusive and often unemployed ; Roberts despised him .
The couple had Nancy , who died at 37 on February 9 , 2014 , of an apparent drug overdose .
The marriage ended in 1983 , with Betty Lou divorcing Motes on cruelty grounds ; she had stated that marrying him was the biggest mistake of her life .
Roberts own father died of cancer when she was wanted to be a veterinarian as a child .
She also played the clarinet in her school band .
After graduating from Smyrna Campbell High School , she attended Georgia State University but did not graduate .
She later headed to New York City to pursue a career in acting .
Once there , she signed with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes .
== Acting career ==
=== 1980s ===
Roberts made her first big screen appearance in the film Satisfaction ( 1988 ) , alongside Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman , as a band member looking for a summer gig .
She had previously performed a small role opposite her brother Eric , in Blood Red ( she has two words of dialogue ) , filmed in 1987 , although it was not released until 1989 .
Her first television appearance was as a juvenile rape victim in the initial season of the series Crime Story with Dennis Farina , in the episode titled The Survivor , broadcast on February 13 , 1987 .
Her first critical success with moviegoers was her performance in the independent film Mystic Pizza in 1988 ; that same year , she had a role in the finale of Miami Vice .
In 1989 , she was featured in Steel Magnolias , as a young bride with diabetes , and received both her first Academy Award nomination ( as Best Supporting Actress ) and first Golden Globe Award win ( Motion Picture Best Supporting Actress ) for her performance .
=== 1990s ===
Roberts became known to worldwide audiences when she starred with Richard Gere in the story , Pretty Woman , in 1990 , playing an assertive freelance hooker with a heart of gold .
Roberts won the role after Michelle Pfeiffer , Molly Ringwald , Meg Ryan , Jennifer Jason Leigh , Karen Allen , and Daryl Hannah ( her in Steel Magnolias ) turned it down .
The role also earned her a second Oscar nomination , this time as Best Actress , and second Golden Globe Award win , as Motion Picture Best Actress ( Musical or Comedy ) .
Pretty Woman saw the highest number of ticket sales in the ever for a romantic comedy , and made million starred as one of five students conducting clandestine experiments that produce experiences in the supernatural thriller Flatliners , in 1990 .
Her next film was the commercially successful thriller Sleeping with the Enemy ( 1991 ) , in which she took on the role of a battered wife who escapes her abusive husband , played by Patrick Bergin , and begins a new life in Iowa .
Roberts played Tinkerbell in Steven Spielberg Hook , and starred as a nurse in Joel Schumacher romance film Dying Young ; both films were also released in 1991 , to a highly positive commercial took a hiatus from the screen , during which she made no films other than a cameo appearance in Robert Altman The Player ( 1992 ) .
In early 1993 , she was the subject of a People magazine cover story asking , What Happened to Julia Roberts .
Roberts starred with Denzel Washington in the thriller The Pelican Brief ( 1993 ) , based on John Grisham 1992 novel of the same name .
In it , she played a young law student who uncovers a conspiracy , putting herself and others in danger .
The film was a commercial success , grossing million worldwide .
None of her next film releases I Love Trouble ( 1994 ) , ( 1994 ) and Something to Talk About ( 1995 ) were particularly by critics .
In 1996 , she in the second season of Friends ( episode 13 , The One After the Superbowl ) , and appeared with Liam Neeson in the historical drama Michael Collins , portraying Kitty Kiernan , the fiancée of the assassinated Irish revolutionary leader .
Stephen Frears Mary Reilly , her other 1996 film , was a critical and commercial the late 1990s , Roberts enjoyed renewed success in the romantic comedy genre .
In My Best Friend Wedding ( 1997 ) , she starred opposite Dermot Mulroney , Cameron Diaz and Rupert Everett , as a food critic who realizes she in love with her best friend and tries to win him back after he decides to marry someone else .
The film was a global hit and is considered to be one of the best romantic comedy films of all time .
In 1998 , Roberts appeared on Sesame Street opposite the character Elmo , and starred in the drama Stepmom , alongside Susan Sarandon , revolving around the complicated relationship between a mother and the future stepmother of her children .
While reviews were mixed , the film made million paired with Hugh Grant for Notting Hill ( 1999 ) , portraying a famous actress falling in love with a struggling book store owner .
The film displaced Four Weddings and a Funeral as the biggest British hit in the history of cinema , with earnings equalling 363 million worldwide .
An exemplary of modern romantic comedies in mainstream culture , the film was also received well by critics .
CNN reviewer Paul Clinton called Roberts the queen of the romantic comedy [ whose ] reign continues , and remarked : Notting Hill stands alone as another funny and heartwarming story about love against all odds .
She reunited with Richard Gere and Garry Marshall , both of Pretty Woman , to play a woman who has left a string of fiancés at the altar in Runaway Bride , also released in 1999 .
Runaway Bride received generally mixed reviews from critics , but it did very well at the box office , grossing million around the globe .
Roberts was a guest star in Empire , a Season 9 episode of the television series Law Order , with regular cast member Benjamin Bratt , who at the time , was her boyfriend .
Her performance earned her a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series .
=== 2000s ===
In 2000 , Roberts portrayed environmental activist Erin Brockovich in her fight against the Pacific Gas and Electric Company ( PG E ) of California in the film Erin Brockovich , for which she became the first actress to be paid 20 million for a film ; Rolling Stone magazine Peter Travers wrote , Roberts shows the emotional toll on Erin as she tries to stay responsible to her children and to a job that has provided her with a first taste of , while Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman felt that it was a delight to watch Roberts , with her flirtatious sparkle and undertow of melancholy .
Erin Brockovich made million worldwide , and Roberts won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role .
In December 2000 , Roberts , who had been the actress through the 1990s , became the first actress to make The Hollywood Reporter list of the 50 most influential women in show business since the list had begun in 1992 .
In the same year , her Shoelace Productions company received a deal with Joe Roth .
Roberts first film following Erin Brockovich was the road gangster comedy , The Mexican ( 2001 ) , giving her a chance to work with friend Brad Pitt .
The film script was originally intended to be filmed as an independent production without major motion picture stars , but Roberts and Pitt , who had for some time been looking for a project they could do together , learned about it and decided to sign on .
Though advertised as a typical romantic comedy star vehicle , the film does not focus solely on the relationship and the two shared relatively little screen time together .
The Mexican earned million at the box next film , the romantic comedy America Sweethearts ( also 2001 ) , starred Roberts along with Billy Crystal , John Cusack , and Catherine .
Directed by Joe Roth , the Hollywood farce centers on a supercouple , Gwen and Eddie , who separate when she dumps him for another man .
Roberts portrayed Gwen sister and assistant who has been secretly in love with Eddie ( Cusack ) for years .
Reviews of the film were generally unfavorable : critics felt that despite its famous cast , the movie lacked sympathetic characters and was only funny in spurts .
A commercial success , it grossed over 138 million worldwide , fall 2001 , Roberts teamed with Erin Brockovich director Steven Soderbergh for Ocean Eleven , a caper film and remake of the 1960 Rat Pack film of the same name , featuring an ensemble cast including George Clooney , Brad Pitt , and Matt Damon .
Roberts played Tess Ocean , the of leader Danny Ocean ( Clooney ) , originally played by Angie Dickinson , who is dating a casino owner played by Andy García .
A success with critics and at the box office alike , Ocean Eleven became the fifth film of the year with a total of 450 million 2003 , Roberts was cast in Mike Newell drama film Mona Lisa Smile , also starring Kirsten Dunst , Maggie Gyllenhaal , and Julia Stiles .
Roberts received a record 25 million for her portrayal of a art history professor at Wellesley College in 1953 the highest ever earned by an actress until then .
The film garnered largely lukewarm reviews by critics , who found it predictable and safe .
In 2004 , Roberts replaced Cate Blanchett in Mike Nichols Closer , a romantic drama film written by Patrick Marber , based on his 1997 play of the same name .
The film also starred Jude Law , Natalie Portman , and Clive Owen .
Also in 2004 , she reprised the role of Tess Ocean in the sequel Ocean Twelve .
The film was deliberately much more unconventional than the first , epitomized by a sequence in which Roberts character impersonates the Julia Roberts , due to what the film characters believe is their strong resemblance .
Though less well reviewed than Eleven , the film became another major success at the box office , with a gross of 363 million worldwide , mostly from its international run .
Unlike all the male cast members , Roberts did not appear in the series third and final installment , Ocean Thirteen ( 2007 ) , due to script issues .
In 2005 , she was featured in the music video for the single Dreamgirl by the Dave Matthews Band ; it was her first music video appearance .
Roberts appeared in The Hollywood Reporter list of the 10 actresses every year from 2002 ( when the magazine began compiling its list ) to providing her voice for roles in the 2006 animated films The Ant Bully and Charlotte Web , Roberts made her Broadway debut on April 19 , 2006 , as Nan in a revival of Richard Greenberg 1997 play Three Days of Rain opposite Bradley Cooper and Paul Rudd .
Although the play grossed nearly 1 million in ticket sales during its first week and was a commercial success throughout its limited run , her performance drew criticism .
Ben Brantley of The New York Times described Roberts as being fraught with ( especially in the first act ) [ and ] only glancingly acquainted with the two characters she plays .
Brantley also criticized the overall production , writing that it almost impossible to discern its artistic virtues from this wooden and splintered interpretation , directed by Joe Mantello .
Writing in the New York Post , Clive Barnes declared , Hated the play .
To be sadly honest , even hated her .
At least I liked the if three days of it can seem an eternity .
Her next film was Charlie Wilson War , with Tom Hanks and Philip Seymour Hoffman , directed by Mike Nichols ; Roberts played socialite Joanne Herring , the love interest of Democratic Texas Congressman Charles Wilson .
It was released on December 21 , 2007 , to critical acclaim , with Roberts eventually earning her sixth Golden Globe nomination .
Fireflies in the Garden , an independent drama in which Roberts played a mother whose death sets the story in motion , also starred Ryan Reynolds and Willem Dafoe ; the film was screened at the 2008 Berlin International Film Festival and was subsequently shown in European did not get a North American release until 2011 .
In 2009 , Roberts starred with Clive Owen in the moderately successful comic thriller Duplicity , playing a CIA agent collaborating with another spy to carry out a complicated con .
For her performance , she received her seventh Golden Globe nomination .
Also in 2009 , Lancôme announced that Roberts would become their global ambassador for their company .
=== 2010s ===
In 2010 , Roberts played an Army captain on a leave , as part of a large ensemble cast , in the romantic comedy Valentine Day , and starred as an author finding herself following a divorce in the film adaptation of Eat Pray Love .
While she received 3 million up front against 3 percent of the gross for her role in Valentine Day , Eat Pray Love had the highest debut at the box office for Roberts in a role since America Sweethearts .
Later in the year , she signed a extension with Lancôme for 50 million .
In 2011 , she appeared as a college teacher and the love interest of a man returning to education in the romantic comedy Larry Crowne , opposite Tom Hanks , who directed and played the title role .
The movie received generally mediocre reviews , although Roberts comedic performance was praised .
In Mirror Mirror ( 2012 ) , the Tarsem Singh adaptation of Snow White , Roberts portrayed Queen Clementianna , Snow White evil stepmother , opposite Lily 2013 , Roberts starred alongside Meryl Streep and Ewan McGregor in the black comedy drama August : Osage County , about a dysfunctional family that into the familial house when their patriarch suddenly disappears .
Her performance earned her nominations for the Golden Globe Award , Screen Actors Guild Award , Critics Choice Award , and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress , amongst other accolades .
It was her fourth Academy Award 2014 , Roberts starred as Emma Brookner , a character based on Linda Laubenstein , in the television adaptation of Larry Kramer play , The Normal Heart , which aired on HBO ; the film was critically acclaimed and Vanity Fair , in its review , wrote : Roberts , meanwhile , hums with righteous , Erin anger .
Between this and August : Osage County , she carving out a nice new niche for herself , playing brittle women who show their love and concern through explosive temper .
Her role garnered her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie .
She also narrated Women in Hollywood , an episode of the second season of Makers : Women Who Make America , in 2014 .
In 2015 , Roberts appeared in Givenchy campaign , and starred as a grieving mother opposite Nicole Kidman and Chiwetel Ejiofor in the film Secret in Their Eyes , a remake of the 2009 Argentine film of the same name , both based on the novel La pregunta de sus ojos by author Eduardo 2016 , she reunited with Garry Marshall again to appear as an accomplished author who gave her child for adoption in the romantic comedy Mother Day , opposite Jennifer Aniston , Kate Hudson , Jason Sudeikis , and Timothy Olyphant .
The film received overwhelmingly negative reviews , but budgeted at 25 million , was a moderate box office success , grossing million .
She also starred as a television director in the thriller Money Monster , directed by Jodie Foster and alongside George Clooney and Jack Wonder ( 2017 ) , the film adaptation of the 2012 novel of the same name by Palacio , Roberts played the mother of a boy with Treacher Collins syndrome .
The Times felt Roberts lifts every one of her scenes in Wonder to places , as part of a positive reception , and with a worldwide gross of million , Wonder emerged as one of Roberts most widely seen films .
Roberts took on the role of a caseworker at a secret government facility in her first television series , Homecoming , which premiered on November 2 , 2018 on Amazon Video .
== Film production ==
Roberts runs the production company Red Om Films ( Red Om is Moder spelled backwards , after her husband last name ) with her sister , Lisa Roberts Gillan , and Marisa Yeres Gill .
Through Red Om , Roberts served as an executive producer of the first four films of the American Girl film series ( based on the American Girl line of dolls ) , released between 2004 and 2008 .
== Personal life ==
=== Relationships and marriages ===
Roberts had romantic relationships with actors Jason Patric , Liam Neeson , Kiefer Sutherland , Dylan McDermott , and Matthew Perry .
She was briefly engaged to Sutherland ; they broke up three days before their scheduled wedding on June 11 , 1991 .
On June 25 , 1993 , she married country singer Lyle Lovett ; the wedding took place at James Lutheran Church in Marion , Indiana .
They separated in March 1995 and subsequently divorced .
From 1998 to 2001 , Roberts dated actor Benjamin and her husband , cameraman Daniel Moder , met on the set of her film The Mexican in 2000 while she was still dating Bratt .
At the time , Moder was married to Vera Steimberg .
He filed for divorce a little over a year later , and after it was finalized , he and Roberts wed on July 4 , 2002 , at her ranch in Taos , New Mexico .
Together , they have three children : twins , a daughter and a son , born in November 2004 , and another son born in June 2007 .
=== Religious beliefs ===
In 2010 , Roberts said she was Hindu .
Roberts is a devotee of the guru Neem Karoli Baba , a picture of whom drew Roberts to September 2009 , Swami Daram Dev of Ashram Hari Mandir in Pataudi , where Roberts was shooting Eat Pray Love , gave her children new names after Hindu gods : Laxmi for Hazel , Ganesh for Phinnaeus and Krishna Balram for Henry .
=== Philanthropy ===
Roberts has given her time and resources to UNICEF as well as to other charitable organizations .
On May 10 , 1995 , Roberts arrived in , as she said , to educate myself .
The poverty she found was overwhelming .
My heart is just bursting , she said .
UNICEF officials hoped that her visit would trigger an outburst of giving : 10 million in aid was sought at the 2000 , Roberts narrated Silent Angels , a documentary about Rett syndrome , a neurodevelopmental disorder .
The documentary was designed to help raise public awareness about the disease .
In July 2006 , Roberts became a spokeswoman for Earth Biofuels , as well as chair of the company newly formed Advisory Board promoting the use of renewable fuels .
She supported Gucci Chime For Change campaign that aims to spread female was the voice of Mother Nature in a 2014 short film for Conservation International , intended to raise awareness about climate change .
== Awards and nominations ==
== Filmography ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Mark Bego .
Julia Roberts : America Sweetheart ( New York : AMI Books , 2003 ) .
ISBN 1932270094 .
Paul Donnelley .
Julia Roberts Confidential : The Unauthorised Biography ( London : Virgin , 2003 ) .
ISBN 1852270233 .
James Spada .
Julia : Her Life ( New York : St Martin Press , 2004 ) .
ISBN 0312285655 Frank Sanello .
Julia Roberts : Pretty Superstar ( Edinburgh : Mainstream 2010 ) .
ISBN 1845966651 .
== External links ==
Julia Roberts at the Encyclopædia Britannica Julia Roberts on IMDb Julia Roberts at the Internet Broadway Database Julia Roberts at AllMovie Julia Roberts at Rotten Tomatoes
