Sean Justin Penn ( born August 17 , 1960 ) is an American actor , director , screenwriter , and producer .
He has won two Academy Awards , for his roles in the mystery drama Mystic River ( 2003 ) and the biopic Milk ( 2008 ) .
Penn began his acting career in television , with a brief appearance in episode 112 of Little House on the Prairie on December 4 , 1974 , and directed by his father Leo Penn .
Following his film debut in the drama Taps ( 1981 ) , and a diverse range of film roles in the 1980s , including Fast Times at Ridgemont High ( 1982 ) , Penn garnered critical attention for his roles in the crime dramas At Close Range ( 1986 ) , State of Grace ( 1990 ) , and Carlito Way ( 1993 ) .
He became known as a prominent leading actor with the drama Dead Man Walking ( 1995 ) , for which he earned his first Academy Award nomination and the Best Actor Award at the Berlin Film Festival .
Penn received another two Oscar nominations for Woody Allen Sweet and Lowdown ( 1999 ) and the drama I Am Sam ( 2001 ) , before winning his first Academy Award for Best Actor in 2003 for Mystic River and a second one in 2008 for Milk .
He has also won a Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival for the Nick She So Lovely ( 1997 ) , and two Best Actor Awards at the Venice Film Festival for the indie film Hurlyburly ( 1998 ) and the drama 21 Grams ( 2003 ) .
Penn made his feature film directorial debut with The Indian Runner ( 1991 ) , followed by the drama film The Crossing Guard ( 1995 ) and the mystery film The Pledge ( 2001 ) .
Penn directed one of the 11 segments of 01 September 11 ( 2002 ) , a compilation film made in response to the September 11 attacks .
His fourth feature film , the biographical drama survival movie Into the Wild ( 2007 ) , garnered critical acclaim and two Academy Award nominations .
In addition to his film work , Penn has engaged in political and social activism , including his criticism of the George Bush administration , his contact with the Presidents of Cuba and Venezuela , and his humanitarian work in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and the 2010 Haiti earthquake .
== Early life ==
Penn was born in Santa Monica , California , to actor and director Leo Penn , and actress Eileen Ryan ( née Annucci ) .
His older brother is musician Michael Penn .
His younger brother , actor Chris Penn , died in 2006 .
His paternal grandparents were Jewish emigrants from the Russian Empire , while his mother is a Catholic of Irish and Italian descent .
Penn was raised in a secular home in Malibu , California , and attended Malibu Park Junior High School and Santa Monica High School , as Malibu had no high school at that time .
He began making short films with some of his childhood friends , including actors Emilio Estevez and Charlie Sheen , who lived near his home .
== Career ==
=== Acting ===
Penn appeared in a 1974 episode of the Little House on the Prairie television series as an extra when his father , Leo , directed some of the episodes .
Penn launched his film career with the Taps ( 1981 ) , where he played a military high school cadet .
A year later , he appeared in the hit comedy Fast Times at Ridgemont High ( 1982 ) , in the role of Jeff Spicoli ; his character helped popularize the word dude in popular culture .
Next , Penn appeared as Mick , a troubled youth , in the drama Bad Boys ( 1983 ) .
The role earned Penn favorable reviews and his career as a serious actor .
Penn played Andrew Daulton Lee in the film The Falcon and the Snowman ( 1985 ) , which closely followed an actual criminal case .
Lee was a former drug dealer by trade , convicted of espionage for the Soviet Union and originally sentenced to life in prison , but was paroled in 1998 .
Penn later hired Lee as his personal assistant , partly because he wanted to reward Lee for allowing him to play Lee in the film ; Penn was also a firm believer in rehabilitation and thought Lee should be successfully reintegrated into society , since he was a free man starred in the drama At Close Range ( 1986 ) which received critical acclaim .
He stopped acting for a few years in the early 1990s , having been dissatisfied with the industry , and focused on making his directing Academy Awards first recognized his work in nominating him for playing a racist murderer on death row in the drama film Dead Man Walking ( 1995 ) .
He was nominated again for his comedic performance as an egotistical jazz guitarist in the film Sweet and Lowdown ( 1999 ) .
He received his third nomination after portraying a mentally handicapped father in I am Sam ( 2001 ) .
Penn finally won for his role in the Boston Mystic River ( 2003 ) .
In 2004 , Penn played Samuel Bicke , a character based on Samuel Byck , who in 1974 attempted and failed to assassinate President Richard Nixon , in The Assassination of Richard Nixon ( 2004 ) .
The same year , he was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences .
Next , Penn portrayed governor Willie Stark ( based on Huey Long ) in an adaptation of Robert Penn Warren classic 1946 American novel All the King Men ( 2006 ) .
The film was a critical and commercial failure , named by a 2010 Forbes article as the biggest flop in the last five November 2008 , Penn earned positive reviews for his portrayal of icon and politician Harvey Milk in the biopic Milk ( 2008 ) , and was nominated for best actor for the 2008 Independent Spirit Awards .
The film also earned Penn his fifth nomination and second win for the Academy Award for Best Actor .
Penn starred as Joseph Wilson in Fair Game ( 2010 ) , a film adaptation of Valerie Plame 2007 memoir .
He in the drama The Tree of Life ( 2011 ) , which won the Palme at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival .
In 2015 , Penn starred in The Gunman , a action thriller based on the novel The Prone Gunman , by Manchette .
Jasmine Trinca , Idris Elba , Ray Winstone , Mark Rylance , and fellow Javier Bardem appear in supporting roles .
Penn plays Jim Terrier , a sniper on a mercenary assassination team who kills the minister of mines of the Congo .
=== Directing ===
Penn made his directorial debut with The Indian Runner ( 1991 ) , a crime drama film based on Bruce Springsteen song Highway Patrolman , from the album Nebraska ( 1982 ) .
He also directed music videos , such as Shania Twain Dance with the One That Brought You ( 1993 ) , Lyle Lovett North Dakota ( 1993 ) , and Peter Gabriel The Barry Williams Show ( 2002 ) .
He has since directed three more films , all well received by critics : the indie thriller The Crossing Guard ( 1995 ) , the mystery film The Pledge ( 2001 ) , and the biographical drama survival film Into the Wild ( 2007 ) .
Penn fifth directorial feature The Last Face ( 2016 ) premiered at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival .
=== Writing ===
In March 2018 , Atria Books published Penn novel Bob Honey Who Just Do Stuff .
After the book release , Penn went on a highly publicized press tour .
He claimed that he no longer had a generic interest in making films , and being a writer will dominate my creative energies for the foreseeable future .
== Personal life ==
Penn was engaged to actress Elizabeth McGovern , his in Racing with the Moon ( 1984 ) .
He also had a brief relationship with Susan met Madonna in February 1985 , and they married that August on her 27th birthday ; Penn turned 25 the next day .
The two starred in the panned and Shanghai Surprise ( 1986 ) , directed by Jim Goddard , and Madonna dedicated her third studio album True Blue ( 1986 ) to Penn , referring to him in the liner notes as the coolest guy in the universe .
The marriage was marred by violent outbursts against the press , including one incident when Penn was arrested for assaulting a photographer on a film set ; Penn was sentenced to 60 days in jail in , of which he served 33 days .
Madonna filed for divorce in December 1987 but later withdrew the papers , only to file them again in January 1989 .
Madonna reportedly filed an assault complaint that she was beaten in her Malibu , California home by her estranged husband , but in January 1989 , the Associated Press reported that she had dropped assault charges .
Penn was alleged to have struck Madonna on multiple occasions , but in 2015 Madonna stated the allegations were completely outrageous , malicious , reckless , and false the end of his first marriage , Penn moved in with actress Robin Wright , and their first child , a daughter named Dylan Frances , was born April 13 , 1991 .
Their second child , son Hopper Jack , was born August 6 , 1993 .
Penn and Wright separated in 1995 , during which time he developed a relationship with Jewel , after he spotted her performing on Late Night with Conan .
He invited her to compose a song for his film The Crossing Guard ( 1995 ) and followed her on and Wright reconciled , married on April 27 , 1996 , and lived in Ross , California .
The couple filed for divorce in December 2007 but reconciled several months later , requesting a court dismissal of their divorce case .
In April 2009 , Penn filed for legal separation , only to withdraw the case once again when the couple reconciled in May .
On August 12 , 2009 , Wright filed for divorce again .
The couple divorce was finalized on July 22 , 2010 ; the couple reached a private agreement on child and spousal support , division of assets , and custody of Hopper , who was almost 17 at the 2013 to 2015 , Penn was in a relationship with South African actress Charlize began a relationship with Australian actress Leila George in 2016 .
They married on July 30 , 2020 .
== Political views and activism ==
Penn has been outspoken in supporting numerous political and social causes .
On December , 2002 , he visited Iraq to protest the Bush Administration apparent plans for a military strike on Iraq .
On June 10 , 2005 , Penn made a visit to Iran .
Acting as a journalist on an assignment for the San Francisco Chronicle , he attended a Friday prayer at Tehran University .
On January 7 , 2006 , Penn was a special guest at the Progressive Democrats of America , where he was joined by author and media critic Norman Solomon and activist Cindy Sheehan .
The Out of Iraq Forum , which took place in Sacramento , California , was organized to promote the movement calling for an end to the War in December 18 , 2006 , Penn received the Christopher Reeve First Amendment Award from the Creative Coalition for his commitment to free speech .
In August 2008 , Penn made an appearance at one of Ralph Nader Open the Debates Super Rallies .
He protested the political exclusion of Nader and other third parties .
In October 2008 , Penn traveled to Cuba , where he met with and interviewed President Raúl Castro .
In February 2012 , he stood beside Hugo Chávez while Venezuela supported the Syrian government during the Syrian October 2020 , Penn tweeted in support of Armenia in regards to the war between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
He also criticized Turkey involvement in the conflict and close States ties .
He stated : Armenians are being slaughtered by Trump pal Erdogan with weapons WE provided .
THIS is NOT America
Biden for America s new birth .
=== Criticism of President Bush ===
On October 18 , 2002 , Penn placed a advertisement in the Washington Post asking then President George Bush to end a cycle of violence .
It was written as an open letter and referred to the planned attack on Iraq and the War on the letter , Penn also criticized the Bush administration for its deconstruction of civil liberties and its simplistic and inflammatory view of good and evil .
Penn visited Iraq briefly in December 2002 .
Sean is one of the few , remarked his Madonna .
Good for him .
Most celebrities are keeping their heads down .
Nobody wants to be unpopular .
But then Americans , by and large , are pretty ignorant of what going on in the world .
The Post advertisement was cited as a primary reason for the development of his relationship with Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez .
In one of his televised speeches , Chávez used and read aloud an open letter Penn wrote to Bush .
The letter condemned the Iraq War , called for Bush to be impeached , and also called Bush , Vice President Dick Cheney , and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice villainously and criminally obscene people .
On April 19 , 2007 , Penn appeared on The Colbert Report and had a versus Stephen Colbert that was judged by Robert Pinsky .
This stemmed from some of Penn criticisms of Bush .
His exact quote was We cower as you point your fingers telling us to support our troops .
You and the smarmy pundits in your those who bathe in the moisture of your soiled and can take that noise and shove it .
He won the contest with points to Colbert 1 .
On December 7 , 2007 , Penn said he supported Ohio Congressman Dennis Kucinich for President in 2008 , and criticized Bush handling of the Iraq war .
Penn questioned whether Bush twin daughters supported the war in Iraq .
=== Hurricane Katrina ===
In September 2005 , Penn traveled to New Orleans , Louisiana , to aid Hurricane Katrina victims .
He was physically involved in rescuing people , although there was criticism that his involvement was a PR stunt as he hired a photographer to come along with his entourage .
Penn denied such accusations in an article he wrote for The Huffington Post .
Director Spike Lee interviewed Penn for Lee documentary about Hurricane Katrina , When the Levees Broke : A Requiem in Four Acts ( 2006 ) .
=== Support for marriage ===
On February 22 , 2009 , Penn received the Academy Award for Best Actor for the film Milk .
In his acceptance speech , he said : I think that it is a good time for those who voted for the ban against gay marriage to sit and reflect and anticipate their great shame and the shame in their grandchildren eyes if they continue that way of support .
We got to have equal rights for everyone
=== Relief efforts following 2010 Haiti earthquake ===
After the 2010 Haiti earthquake , Penn founded the Haitian Relief Organization , which operated a person tent camp .
Before starting the organization , Penn had never visited Haiti and did not speak French or Creole .
When asked for his comment on critics who questioned his experience , he said he hopes they die screaming of rectal cancer .
Due to his visibility as an advocate for rescue and aid efforts in the aftermath , Penn was designated by president Michel Martelly as for Haiti , the first time that a citizen has been designated as such in the country history .
Penn received the designation on January 31 , 2012 .
In 2012 , at the 12th World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates , Penn received the Peace Summit Award .
=== Pakistan ===
Penn gained significant attention in the Pakistan media when he visited Karachi and Badin in 2012 .
On March 23 , 2012 , he visited villages of Karim Bux Jamali , Dargah Shah Gurio and Peero Lashari in Badin District .
He was accompanied by Consul General William Martin and distributed blankets , quilts , kitchen items and other goods amongst flood March 24 , 2012 , Penn also visited Bilquis Edhi Female Child Home and met Pakistan iconic humanitarian worker Abdul Sattar Edhi and his wife , Bilquis Edhi .
He also laid floral wreaths and paid respect at the shrine of Abdullah Shah Ghazi .
=== Release of Jacob Ostreicher from Bolivian prison ===
Penn is believed to have played a role in getting American entrepreneur Jacob Ostreicher released from a Bolivian prison in 2013 , and was credited by Ostreicher for having personally nursed him back to health upon his release .
=== CORE ===
Penn is the founder of the nonprofit organization Community Organized Relief Effort ( CORE ) , which has distributed aid to Haiti following the 2010 earthquake and Hurricane Matthew as well as administered free tests in the amid the pandemic .
== Controversies ==
=== Defense of Hugo Chávez ===
In March 2010 , Penn called for the arrest of those referring to Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez as a dictator .
The two were friends , and when Chávez died in 2013 , Penn said : Venezuela and its revolution will endure under the proven leadership of Vice President Nicolás Maduro .
Today the United States lost a friend it never knew it had .
And poor people around the world lost a champion .
I lost a friend I was blessed to have .
=== Falkland Islands controversy ===
In February 2012 , Penn met with the President of Argentina , Cristina Fernández de Kirchner , in Buenos Aires where he made a statement on the dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom over the Falkland Islands , saying : I know I came in a very sensitive moment in terms of diplomacy between Argentina and the UK over the Falkland Islands .
And I hope that diplomats can establish true dialogue in order to solve the conflict as the world today can not tolerate ridiculous demonstrations of colonialism .
The way of dialogue is the only way to achieve a better solution for both nations .
The comments were taken as support of Argentina claim to the islands and evoked strong reactions in the British media , with one satirical article in The Daily Telegraph requesting that Penn return his Malibu estate to the Mexicans .
Falklands War veteran and political activist Simon Weston stated Sean Penn does not know what he is talking about and , frankly , he should shut up .
His [ Penn ] views are irrelevant and it only serves to fuel the fire of the Argentinians and get them more pumped up while British Conservative MP Patrick Mercer dismissed Penn statement as moronic .
Lauren Collins of The New Yorker wrote : As of today , Sean Penn is the new Karl man upon whom , having disrespected something dear to the United Kingdom , the British papers most gleefully pile contempt later claimed that he had been misrepresented by the British press and that his criticism of colonialism was a reference to the deployment of Prince William as an rescue pilot , describing it as a message of intimidation .
He claimed that the Prince posting meant the automatic deployment of warships , and stated : My oh my , are people sensitive to the word , particularly those who implement colonialism .
In a piece written in The Guardian , Penn wrote that the legalisation of Argentinian immigration to the Islands is one that it seems might have been addressed , but for the speculative discovery of booming offshore oil in the surrounding seas this past year .
He further wrote that irresponsible journalism had suggested that I had taken a specific position against those currently residing in the Islands , that they should either be deported or absorbed into Argentine rule .
I neither said , nor insinuated that .
=== Oscar green card joke ===
At the 87th Academy Awards , Penn presented the award for Best Picture .
Before presenting the award to Mexican Alejandro González Iñárritu for Birdman , Penn joked , Who gave this son of a bitch his green card
Some people deemed the remark racist towards Latin Americans , and offensive to those who attempt to legally immigrate into the United said that it was a joke between him and Penn , who worked together on 21 Grams , and that he found it hilarious .
Penn later went on record defending his comments , saying , I have absolutely no apologies .
In fact , I have a big you for every anybody who is so stupid not to have gotten the irony when you got a country that is so xenophobic .
If they had their way , you would have great filmmakers like Alejandro working in this country .
Thank God we do .
=== Lee Daniels lawsuit ===
In an interview published September 16 , 2015 , director and showrunner Lee Daniels responded to criticism about Terrence Howard continued career in light of his domestic violence issues by referencing Penn rumored history of domestic violence , saying : [ Terrence ] ai done nothing different than Marlon Brando or Sean Penn , and all of a sudden he some demon .
In response , Penn launched a 10 million defamation suit against Daniels , alleging that he had never been arrested for or charged with domestic violence .
Penn dropped the lawsuit in May 2016 after Daniels retracted his statement and apologized .
=== El Chapo interview ===
A day after Mexican officials announced the capture of Joaquín El Chapo Guzmán in a bloody raid , Rolling Stone revealed on January 9 , 2016 that Sean Penn , along with actress Kate del Castillo , had conducted a secret interview with El Chapo prior to his arrest .
Del Castillo was contacted by Guzmán lawyer ( who was under CISEN surveillance ) to talk about producing a biographical film about Guzmán and communication increased following Guzmán escape from prison in July 2015 .
The deal for the interview was brokered by del Castillo .
According to published text messages with del Castillo , Guzmán did not know who Sean Penn was .
CISEN released photographs of del Castillo at the meetings with Guzmán lawyers and of the arrival of the actress and Penn to Mexico .
The interview was criticized by some , including the White House , which called the interview maddening .
Mexican authorities said they were seeking to question Penn over the interview , which had not been approved by either the American or Mexican government .
Penn and del Castillo meeting with Guzmán is under investigation by the Attorney General of Mexico .
== Filmography ==
Penn has appeared in more than 50 films and won many awards during his career as an actor and director .
He has won two Academy Awards for Best Actor for Mystic River ( 2003 ) and Milk ( 2008 ) , and was nominated three more times in the same category for Dead Man Walking ( 1995 ) , Sweet and Lowdown ( 1999 ) , and I Am Sam ( 2001 ) .
He also received a Directors Guild of America nomination for directing Into the Wild ( 2007 ) .
== References ==
== External links ==
Sean Penn on IMDb Sean Penn at the Internet Broadway Database Sean Penn on Twitter
