Canada ( ( listen ) ; French : [ ] ) is a country in North America .
It is north of the United States .
Its land reaches from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Pacific Ocean in the west and the Arctic Ocean to the north .
Canada area is million square kilometres ( million square miles ) , so it is the world second largest country by total area but only the fourth largest country by land area .
It has the world longest coastline which touches three oceans .
Canada has ten provinces and three territories .
Most parts of the country have a cold or severely cold winter climate , but areas to the south are warm in summer .
Much of the land is forests or tundra , with the Rocky Mountains towards the west .
About four fifths of Canada 36 million people live in urban areas near the southern border with the US , the longest between any two countries in the world .
The national capital is Ottawa , and the largest city is Toronto .
Other large cities include Montreal , Vancouver , Calgary , Edmonton , Quebec City , Winnipeg and Hamilton .
Aboriginal people lived in the places that are now Canada for a long time .
In 1537 the French started a colony and the British Empire soon followed .
The two empires fought several wars and in the late 18th century only British North America remained with what is more or less Canada today .
The country was formed with the British North America Act on July 1 , 1867 , from several colonies .
Over time , more provinces and territories became part of Canada .
In 1931 , Canada achieved near total independence with the Statute of Westminster 1931 , and became completely independent when the Canada Act 1982 removed the last remaining ties of legal dependence on the Parliament of the United Kingdom .
Canada is a federal parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy , with Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom as its head of state .
The country is officially bilingual at the federal level , meaning that citizens have the right to communicate with the government in either English or French .
Immigration to Canada has made it one of the world most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations .
Its economy is the eleventh largest in the world , and relies mainly on natural resources and international trade networks .
Canada relationship with its neighbor and biggest trading partner , the , has a big impact on its economy and culture .
Canada is a developed country and has the tenth highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the tenth highest ranking in the Human Development Index .
It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency , civil liberties , quality of life , economic freedom , and education .
Canada is a Commonwealth realm member of the Commonwealth of Nations , a member of the Francophonie , and part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations , the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , the G8 , the G20 , the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Economic Cooperation forum .
== Geography ==
By total area ( including its waters ) , Canada is the country in the world , after Russia .
By land area alone , Canada ranks fourth .
It has the longest border with water ( coastline ) of any country in the world .
It is next to the Pacific , Arctic , and Atlantic Oceans .
It is the only country in the world to be next to three oceans at once .
It has six time is made up of ten provinces and three territories .
The provinces are between the 45th and 60th parallels of latitude , and the territories are to the north of the 60th parallel of latitude .
Most large cities in Canada are in the southern part of the country , including Toronto , Vancouver , and Montreal .
There are very few people living in the northern part of Canada .
Canada extends from the west coast , across the prairies and central Canada , to the Atlantic provinces .
In the north there are three territories , between Alaska and Greenland : the Yukon in the west , then the Northwest Territories , then Nunavut .
Four of the five Great Lakes ( Superior , Huron , Erie , and Ontario ) are shared between Canada and the United States ( Lake Michigan is in the USA ) , and they make up 16 of the Earth fresh water .
The Saint Lawrence Seaway joins the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean , allowing ocean going vessels to travel as far inland as Thunder Bay in Ontario , Canada .
Canada shares land and sea borders with the USA ( the lower 48 states and Alaska ) , Denmark ( Greenland ) , and France ( Pierre and Miquelon a small group of islands off the southern coast off the island of Newfoundland ) .
The geography of Canada is very different from place to place , from high alpine areas in the west , flat grasslands and prairies in the centre , and ancient shield rocks in the east .
Canada contains some of the very last untouched boreal forest in the world .
The Canadian Shield is a vast area of ancient rocks lying in an arc around Hudson Bay , covering more than one third of Canada land area .
This is a unique land of lakes , bogs , swamps , trees , and rocks .
It is a terrain that is very dangerous and difficult to traverse cross country because of lakes , bogs , swamps , trees , and rocks .
Canada has 60 of the world lakes .
== History ==
=== Aboriginal peoples ===
Indigenous peoples lived in what is now Canada for thousands of years before the first Europeans arrived .
The indigenous groups are called the First Nations , the Inuit , and the Métis .
The Métis are people that come from both First Nations and European families .
Together , these three groups are called Indigenous , Aboriginal , or First Peoples .
They used to be called Indians by the Europeans , but this is now considered rude .
Many people think that the first people to live in Canada came from Siberia by using the Bering land bridge at least years ago .
The land bridge used to connect Asia and North European people first came to Canada to settle , the number of Indigenous people living in Canada already was between and two million .
=== European colonization ===
The Vikings were the first Europeans known to land in what is now called Canada , in what is now Newfoundland , led by the Viking explorer Leif Erikson .
They did not stay long , however .
In the early 16th century , Europeans started exploring Canada eastern coast , beginning with John Cabot from England in 1497 , and later Jacques Cartier in 1534 from France .
Alexander Mackenzie later reached the Pacific coast over land , where captains James Cook and George Vancouver went by sea .
The Europeans also traded beaver furs to the First Nations .
Parts of Canada were settled by France , and parts by Great Britain .
In 1605 , was built in Acadia ( today called Nova Scotia ) by the French , led by Samuel de Champlain , and in 1608 he started settling Quebec .
The British took control of the French areas after a battle of the French and Indian War on the Plains of Abraham near Quebec City in 1759 .
After the American Revolutionary War , many people in the new United States wanted to stay loyal to Britain .
Thousands came north to Canada and settled in Nova Scotia , New Brunswick , Quebec , and Ontario .
They were called United Empire Loyalists .
During the War of 1812 , the United States tried to conquer Canada but were defeated .
=== Confederation and expansion ===
On July 1 , 1867 , Canada was united under a federal government .
It included the provinces of Ontario , Quebec , New Brunswick , and Nova Scotia .
Sir John Macdonald was the first prime minister .
Manitoba , the Yukon territory , and the Northwest Territories became part of Canada in 1870 .
British Columbia joined in 1871 , and Prince Edward Island in 1873 .
There were two Red River Rebellions , in and 1885 , both led by Louis Riel .
He fought for more rights for the Métis people , a mix between French and First Nations .
A railroad across the country , the Canadian Pacific Railway , finished in 1885 , made it easier for Canadians to move to the west .
Many Europeans came to the prairies , so Alberta and Saskatchewan became provinces in 1905 .
=== Early 20th century ===
Canadian soldiers fought in World War I for the British Empire .
More Canadians died in this war than any other war .
Canada became better known as a country after its success in capturing Vimy Ridge from the Germans in France in 1917 .
Women were given the right to vote by the end of the war , partly because of the help they gave making weapons while the men fought in Europe .
In 1931 , Canada became fully independent .
Then the government of Canada made all decisions about Canada .
Canadians also fought in World War II .
The Dieppe Raid in 1942 went very badly and most of the soldiers were killed , wounded , or taken prisoner .
Canadians were important in 1944 at Normandy , and they liberated the Netherlands from the Germans .
=== Modern times ===
In 1949 , Newfoundland and Labrador became the 10th province of Canada .
In 1956 , Canadian Lester Pearson , who later became prime minister , helped end the Suez Crisis .
As a result , he won the Nobel Peace Prize .
In 1965 , Pearson helped Canada get a new flag , the Maple Leaf .
Before that , Canadians had used the Red Ensign .
In 1982 , Canada changed its constitution , including a new Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .
The main part of the Constitution is still the 1867 British North America Act .
Some French Canadians today wish to form their own country , separate from the rest of Canada .
The province of Quebec held a referendum ( vote ) in 1980 , but only about 40 wanted to separate .
Another referendum was held in 1995 , with almost 50 voting in favour of leaving Canada .
Since then , fewer people in Quebec have wanted to leave Canada , but it is still important to Quebec politics .
Today , about 25 of Canadians speak French as their first language .
Many people can speak both French and English .
Although most French Canadians live in the province of Quebec , there are communities and people all across Canada .
For example , 40 of the people in the province of New Brunswick and 20 of those in Manitoba have a strong French background , as do some people in Ontario , mainly along its border with Quebec .
In 1999 , Nunavut was created as Canada third territory , out of the eastern Northwest Territories , in an agreement with the Inuit people .
== Government ==
Canada has a government called a constitutional monarchy .
It has a monarch ( meaning a king or queen is the head of that country ) , and is a democracy ( meaning the people of that country rule it ) .
The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II , who is officially the Queen of Canada .
She appoints a Governor General to represent her in the country , however , the choice of Governor General is made by the prime minister .
The Queen powers are mostly exercised by the Governor General , currently Julie Payette .
The Governor General , like the Canadian sovereign ( of Canada ) , is not political and remains above politics , and because of that they do not usually use their powers without the advice of the Prime Minister or other ministers .
The head of government is the Prime Minister .
The current prime minister is Justin Trudeau , who replaced Stephen Harper in October 2015 .
Each province and territory has a premier to lead its government .
The operations of the government are run by the cabinet .
The cabinet is usually formed from the largest party in Parliament .
The Parliament of Canada passes the laws of the country .
The governor general , acting on behalf of the monarch , has the right to veto a law ( meaning the law can not go into effect ) but this right has not been used for some time .
There are five main parties in the Canadian Parliament : the Conservative Party , the New Democratic Party , the Liberal Party , the Bloc Québécois , and the Green Party .
In addition to the five parties with MPs in Parliament , there are fourteen other smaller parties registered with Elections Canada and several MPs who sit as Independents .
=== Provinces and territories ===
Below is a list of provinces and territories .
They are listed by population .
== Climate and its influence ==
Many people from other parts of the world think of Canada as a very cold and snowy place .
While it is true that much of Canada is very far north , most Canadians live in the southern parts , where the weather is much milder .
Nearly two thirds of Canadians live less than 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) from the border .
In some cities the temperature can get very cold in the winter , especially in the inland .
Warm air systems moving in from the Pacific Ocean bring more rain than snow to the Pacific coast , while colder temperatures further inland do result in snow .
Most of Canada can get quite hot in the summer , often over 30 degrees Celsius ( 86 degrees Fahrenheit ) are known to play winter sports such as ice hockey and skiing and snowboarding , and also enjoy many summer sports and games .
== Natural resources ==
Canada has lots of natural resources .
Its large amounts of fish have been used for centuries for food and money .
Hydroelectric power ( electricity by water ) is abundant because of Canada many rivers .
Forests of the west are used for wood .
Besides these renewable resources , Canada has metal ores and oil deposits .
Also , Canada is the leading exporter of zinc , uranium , gold , nickel , aluminum , steel and lead .
= DVDs = == Family ==
== Demographics ==
Around 35 million people live in Canada .
This is almost the same number as in the state of California .
About 80 of the Canadian population live in the southern parts of Canada since the climates are milder than the northern parts of Canada .
A large number of immigrants from almost every part of the world come to live in Canada .
One example is the former Governor General of Canada , Michaëlle Jean , who came to Canada as a young child with her family from Haiti in 1968 .
Today , up to of the population is an immigrant to Canada .
== Healthcare ==
The Canadian government provides universal health care .
The provinces are responsible for health insurance .
Five provinces prohibit all , while Alberta , British Columbia and Newfoundland allow it in a small number of circumstances , and Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick do not restrict it at 2020 the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported a deterioration in the number of acute care beds available in Ontario hospitals per every people in that province .
Ontario is Canada largest province , and is home to Canada largest city , Toronto .
The number of hospital beds available in Ontario is per every people .
This is half the number hospitals beds available in the United States , and the same number available in Mexico .
== References ==
Notes == Other websites ==
Official Government of Canada website CIA World Factbook - Canada Yahoo - Definition of Canada
