New Mexico is a state of the United States of America .
It is considered part of the American Southwest and is bordered by Texas to the east , Oklahoma to the northeast , Colorado to the north , and Arizona to the west .
The northwest corner of the state also touches Utah .
This area is known as the Four Corners because four states meet there .
The state has the nickname Land of Enchantment .
It has been inhabited since ancient times by the Pueblo people , it was first named and founded as Nuevo México ( New Mexico ) in the 1500s by Spain .
The state s ancient Native American and Hispanic history have given New Mexico a unique food type called New Mexican cuisine , and a distinct music style called New Mexico music .
New Mexico became a state on 6 January 1912 and became the 47th state accepted into the United States .
The state capital is Santa Fe .
New Mexico population is as of the July 1 , 2019 population estimate from the Census Bureau .
Most of the people live in the biggest city , Albuquerque .
New Mexico is home to one of the longest trams in the world , the Sandia Peak Tramway , in Albuquerque and one of worlds longest zip lines , the Apache Eagle ZipRider , in Ruidoso .
== Climate ==
The climate for most of the state is generally .
In the summer it can be very hot in southern New Mexico .
The temperature is sometimes over 100 with lows over 70 .
It occasionally snows in the northern part of the state in the winter .
It is drier in the southern portion of the state , and it rarely snows .
New Mexico is usually affected by the North American monsoon from mid June to late September .
== History ==
New Mexico is the home of the Pueblo people , a group of Native Americans .
The area was named Nuevo México ( New Mexico ) by the Spanish in the and officially settled in 1598 , its capital Santa Fe was selected in 1610 .
In the late 1600s , the Pueblo people revolted against the Spanish .
The Spanish returned twelve years later , and made a better attempt at giving the Pueblos better representation in New Mexico s society and government .
One such Spanish governor of New Mexico , that is most well known for his work with Native Americans , was named Tomás Vélez Cachupín .
When Mexico became independent in the early 1800s , New Mexico was part of it .
Mexico wasn t successful in representing the New Mexican people , which lead to another revolt called the Chimayo Rebellion .
In 1846 , the United States and Mexico went to war over a border dispute in Texas ( a former state of Mexico that , after being its own country for a time joined the US ) , and the United States won the war .
The peace treaty the two countries signed gave what is now the American Southwest to the United States .
While most of what was then Northern Mexico did not have a large amount of people living in it , New Mexico had population centers in Pueblo and Spanish towns , especially along the Rio Grande river and in the Sangre de Cristo mountains .
The New Mexican citizens living there were allowed to stay if they agreed to become US Citizens ; over 90 did .
After some time as a territory , the area became a state in 1912 .
== Related pages ==
Colleges and universities in New Mexico List of counties in New Mexico == References ==
== Other websites ==
New Mexico Indian Tribes New Mexico Monuments New Mexico National Parks Gila National Forest
