The Manhattan Project was the program based in the United States which tried to make the first nuclear weapons .
The project went on during World War II , and was run by the Army .
The head of the project was General Leslie Groves , who had led the building of the Pentagon .
The top scientist on the project was Robert Oppenheimer , a famous physicist .
The project cost 2 billion , and created many secret cities and factories , such as a laboratory in Los Alamos , New Mexico , a nuclear reactor in Hanford , Washington , and a uranium processing plant in Oak Ridge , Tennessee .
The Manhattan Project had to find solutions to two difficulties .
The first difficulty is how to make the special isotopes of uranium or plutonium .
This process is called separation and is very slow .
The United States built very big buildings with three different kinds of machine for separation .
They made enough fissionable special isotopes for a few nuclear weapons .
The second difficulty was how to make a bomb that will produce a big nuclear explosion every time .
A weapon with a bad design can make a much smaller nuclear explosion .
This is called a fizzle .
In July 1945 , the Manhattan Project solved the two difficulties and made the first nuclear explosion .
This test of a nuclear weapon was called Trinity and was a success .
The Manhattan Project created two nuclear bombs which the United States used against Japan in 1945 .
== Espionage ==
The Manhattan Project operated under a blanket of tight security .
This was to prevent the Axis countries , especially Nazi Germany , from accelerating their own nuclear projects or undertaking covert operations against the project .
The possibility of sabotage was always present .
At times , people suspected sabotage when equipment failed .
While there were some problems believed to be the result of careless or disgruntled employees , there were no confirmed instances of sabotage .
However , on 10 March 1945 , a Japanese fire balloon struck a power line , and the resulting power surge caused the three reactors at Hanford to be temporarily shut security was difficult because so many people worked on the project .
A special Counter Intelligence Corps detachment handled the project security issues .
By 1943 , it was clear that the Soviet Union was trying to penetrate the project .
Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash , the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command , investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley .
Oppenheimer informed Pash that he had been approached by a fellow professor at Berkeley , Haakon Chevalier , about passing information to the Soviet most successful Soviet spy was Klaus Fuchs .
Fuchs was a member of the British Mission who played an important part at Los Alamos .
The 1950 revelation of Fuchs espionage activities damaged the United States nuclear cooperation with Britain and Canada .
Subsequently , other instances of espionage were uncovered , leading to the arrest of Harry Gold , David Greenglass and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg .
Other spies like George Koval remained unknown for decades .
People will never know the value of the espionage .
One reason was that the Soviet atomic bomb project was held back by a shortage of uranium ore .
The consensus is that espionage saved the Soviets one or two years of effort .
== References ==
== Further reading ==
General , administrative , and diplomatic historiesBernstein , Barton J .
( June 1976 ) .
The Uneasy Alliance : Roosevelt , Churchill , and the Atomic Bomb , .
The Western Political Quarterly .
University of Utah .
29 ( 2 ) : .
JSTOR 448105 .
CS1 maint : ( link ) Fine , Lenore ; Remington , Jesse A .
( 1972 ) .
The Corps of Engineers : Construction in the United States .
Washington , : United States Army Center of Military History .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Frisch , David ( June 1970 ) .
Scientists and the Decision to Bomb Japan .
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .
Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science .
26 ( 6 ) : pp .
maint : extra text ( link ) Gilbert , Keith ( 1969 ) .
History of the Dayton Project ( PDF ) .
Miamisburg , Ohio : Mound Laboratory , Atomic Energy Commission .
OCLC 650540359 .
Retrieved 21 July maint : ( link ) Gosling , Francis George ( 1994 ) .
The Manhattan Project : Making the Atomic Bomb .
Washington , DC : United States Department of Energy , History Division .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Gowing , Margaret ( 1964 ) .
Britain and Atomic Energy , .
London : Macmillan Publishing .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hewlett , Richard ; Anderson , Oscar ( 1962 ) .
The New World , .
University Park : Pennsylvania State University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hewlett , Richard ; Duncan , Francis ( 1969 ) .
Atomic Shield , .
A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission .
University Park : Pennsylvania State University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Holloway , David ( 1994 ) .
Stalin and the Bomb : The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy , .
New Haven , Connecticut : Yale University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Howes , Ruth ; Herzenberg , Caroline ( 1999 ) .
Their Day in the Sun : Women of the Manhattan Project .
Philadelphia : Temple University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hunner , Jon ( 2004 ) .
Inventing Los Alamos : The Growth of an Atomic Community .
Norman : University of Oklahoma Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Johnson , Charles ; Jackson , Charles ( 1981 ) .
City Behind a Fence : Oak Ridge , Tennessee , .
Knoxville : University of Tennessee Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Jones , Vincent ( 1985 ) .
Manhattan : The Army and the Atomic Bomb .
Washington , : United States Army Center of Military History .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Rhodes , Richard ( 1986 ) .
The Making of the Atomic Bomb .
New York : Simon Schuster .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Schwartz , Stephen I .
( 1998 ) .
Atomic Audit : The Costs and Consequences of US Nuclear Weapons .
Washington , : Brookings Institution maint : ( link ) Technical historiesAhnfeldt , Arnold Lorentz , ed .
( 1966 ) .
Radiology in World War II .
Washington , : Office of the Surgeon General , Department of the Army .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Baker , Richard ; Hecker , Siegfried ; Harbur , Delbert ( 1983 ) .
Plutonium : A Wartime Nightmare but a Metallurgist Dream ( PDF ) .
Los Alamos Science .
Los Alamos National Laboratory .
pp .
Retrieved 22 November maint : ( link ) Hanford Cultural Resources Program , Department of Energy ( 2002 ) .
History of the Plutonium Production Facilities , .
Richland , Washington : Hanford Site Historic District .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hansen , Chuck ( 1995a ) .
Volume I : The Development of US Nuclear Weapons .
Swords of Armageddon : US Nuclear Weapons Development since 1945 .
Sunnyvale , California : Chukelea Publications .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hansen , Chuck ( 1995b ) .
Volume V : US Nuclear Weapons Histories .
Swords of Armageddon : US Nuclear Weapons Development since 1945 .
Sunnyvale , California : Chukelea Publications .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Hoddeson , Lillian ; Henriksen , Paul ; Meade , Roger ; Westfall , Catherine ( 1993 ) .
Critical Assembly : A Technical History of Los Alamos During the Oppenheimer Years , .
New York : Cambridge University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Home , ; Low , Morris ( September 1993 ) .
Postwar Scientic Intelligence Missions to Japan .
University of Chicago Press on behalf of History of Science Society .
JSTOR 235645 .
CS1 maint : ( link ) CS1 maint : extra text ( link ) Ruhoff , John ; Fain , Pat ( June 1962 ) .
The First Fifty Critical days .
Mallinckrodt Uranium Division News .
Louis : Mallinckrodt Incorporated .
Retrieved 30 October maint : ( link ) Serber , Robert ; Rhodes , Richard ( 1992 ) .
The Los Alamos Primer : The First Lectures on How to Build an Atomic Bomb .
Berkeley : University of California Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) ( Available on Wikimedia Commons ) Smyth , Henry DeWolf ( 1945 ) .
Atomic Energy for Military Purposes : the Official Report on the Development of the Atomic Bomb under the Auspices of the United States Government , .
Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Thayer , Harry ( 1996 ) .
Management of the Hanford Engineer Works In World War II : How the Corps , DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory Fast Tracked the Original Plutonium Works .
New York : American Society of Civil Engineers Press .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Waltham , Chris ( 20 June 2002 ) .
An Early History of Heavy Water ( PDF ) .
Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of British Columbia .
Retrieved 30 October maint : ( link ) Weinberg , Alvin ( 21 July 1961 ) .
Impact of Science on the United States .
Science , New Series .
American Association for the Advancement of Science .
The Road from Los Alamos .
New York : Simon and Schuster .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Goudsmit , Samuel A .
New York : Henry Schuman .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Groves , Leslie ( 1962 ) .
Now it Can be Told : The Story of the Manhattan Project .
New York : Harper Row .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Libby , Leona Marshall ( 1979 ) .
Uranium People .
New York : Charles Scribner Sons .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Nichols , Kenneth David ( 1987 ) .
The Road to Trinity : A Personal Account of How America Nuclear Policies Were Made .
New York : William Morrow and Company .
OCLC maint : ( link ) Ulam , Stanisław ( 1983 ) .
Adventures of a Mathematician .
New York : Charles Scribner Sons .
OCLC maint : ( link ) == Other websites ==
WW2DB : Operation Trinity and the Manhattan Project
