The Ottoman Empire , officially the Sublime State of Ottomania ( in Ottoman Turkish : دولت عالیه عثمانیه ) , was a multinational state that lasted from 1299 to 1923 .
It was centered in Turkey and controlled the eastern and southern lands around the Mediterranean Sea .
The empire was founded by Osman I around 1299 , and was most powerful from around 1400 to 1600 , when it controlled trade and politics in southeastern Europe , southwest Asia , and northern Africa .
Suleiman the Magnificent was one of the most powerful rulers .
The empire was a collection of conquered countries .
The Sultan sent governors to rule these countries or provinces , with titles such as Pasha or Bey .
The most famous in the early 19th century was Muhammad Ali Pasha .
Besides provinces , the empire also had tributary states .
In later years , the Ottoman Empire began to weaken .
In the later part of the 19th century , it became known as the sick man of Europe .
The empire was defeated in World War I and broke apart .
== History ==
The Ottoman Empire was founded by Osman I in 1299AD .
His son , Orhan , captured the first capital of the Ottoman Empire , Bursa , from the Byzantines .
In the later 1300s , the Ottomans began consolidating power , especially in the Balkans , where Serbia was defeated in 1389 at the Battle of Kosovo Polje by Sultan Murad Murad died at the battle , and Bayezid I took control .
At the 1396 Battle of Nicopolis , a large crusade of the Western European powers was defeated .
Despite this victory , Bayezid was deposed by Tamerlane at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 .
His absence led to a civil war referred to as the Ottoman interregnum .
Mehmed Çelebi won and became Mehmed I .
His son , Murad II had to battle pretenders to the throne backed by the Byzantine Empire .
He retaliated with an attack on Constantinople , and Venice helped the Byzantines .
Murad defeated them at Thessaloniki , and also defeated the Karamanid beylik ( principality ) .
He also defeated Hungary , Poland , and Wallachia at Varna in 1444 .
John Hunyadi , a Hungarian general , tried his hand at defeating the Turks , but he lost in 1448 .
Mehmed the Conqueror conquered Constantinople on May 29 , 1453 .
He also subjugated Albania and expanded tolerance for the Orthodox Church .
Mehmed continued his expansion , along with his son Bayezid II .
Selim I conquered Egypt and the Levant , which were ruled by the Mamluks , in early 1517 .
He also obliterated the Safavid Persians at Chaldiran in 1514 .
The Ottomans were at odds with Portugal over their expansion as well .
Suleiman the Magnificent , his son , captured Belgrade and most of Hungary after the Battle of Mohács in 1526 .
His siege of Vienna was repulsed by the Holy Roman Empire in 1529 .
Transylvania , Wallachia , and Moldavia became tributary to the Ottoman Empire soon afterwards .
In the east , the Ottomans captured Baghdad from the Safavids and partitioned the Caucasus with them .
Meanwhile , Suleiman allied Francis I of France over mutual hatred of the Habsburgs .
This led to Ottoman activity in the Mediterranean , where Rhodes , Tunis , Algiers , and Tripoli would eventually be captured .
Barbarossa Hayreddin led the Ottoman advance .
In 1566 , Suleiman died , and many historians consider this the beginning of the Ottoman stagnation .
The Ottomans lost the war in the battle of Lepanto in 1571 by Philip II of Spain and his Holy League .
The Ottomans quickly recovered , capturing Cyprus from Venice .
However , this defeat shattered the myth of Ottoman invincibility .
The Ottomans suffered many defeats in the next 30 years : the Long War with Austria ended in stalemate and the Safavids invaded the eastern Ottoman provinces .
Murad IV recaptured Iraq and the Caucasus from Persia .
The Sultanate of Women became an epithet for the Ottoman Empire after consorts Kösem Sultan and Turhan Sultan became important in the empire , sometimes making economic decisions in the Sultan place .
The Grand Vizier also took a greater role under the leadership of the Köprülüs .
Crete was captured from Venice and southern Ukraine was captured from Poland .
However , Grand Vizier Kara Mustafa Pasha carelessly opened up the empire to attack when he attacked Vienna .
The Austrians , Poles , Russians , and Venetians all attacked the Ottomans back in the Great Turkish War .
Austria and Poland attacked the overstretched Turks in Hungary and Transylvania while Russia hammered Crimea .
Venice settled to attack Greece .
The warring sides signed the Treaty of Karlowitz , ceding Hungary and Transylvania to Austria , Podolia ( southern Ukraine ) to Poland , Morea ( southern Greece ) to Venice , and Azov ( a Black Sea port ) to Russia .
Russia and Sweden went to war , and the Ottomans got involved .
They retook Azov and then made peace .
Austria , Russia , Venice , and Turkey would go to war several times .
By 1739 , the Ottomans had actually retaken the Morea and Serbia .
In the 1740s and 1750s , the Ottomans began to modernize their military , but in the 1760s , the Ottomans went to war with the Russians again .
Russia took over Crimea in 1783 and claimed that Orthodox Christians living in the Ottoman Empire were under Russian protection .
Selim III continued modernizing the military , but the Janissary corps ( the elite troops ) revolted .
Napoleon attacked Egypt and was repulsed by the British .
Serbia revolted and gained nominal independence in 1815 , but they were still vassals of the Ottoman Empire .
Greece won their independence after a long war of independence from 1821 to 1829 .
The family revolted in 1811 with the support of the Wahhabi sect .
Then , Egypt under Muhammad Ali almost captured Constantinople , but the Russians repulsed them .
The Egyptians settled with the Levant , and the Ottomans tried to retake it .
They were soundly defeated .
Turkey was dubbed the sick man of Europe because of its incompetence in international affairs .
== Decline and reform ==
The Ottoman Tanzimat period brought reform : conscription was introduced , a central bank was formed , homosexuality was decriminalized , law was secularized , and guilds were replaced with factories .
The Christian part of the empire became much more advanced than the Muslim part , and this divide created tension .
Meanwhile , in the 1850s , the British and French protected the Ottoman Empire in the Crimean War .
The debts of the Ottomans led to a state of bankruptcy , and European countries began providing loans and controlling the finances of the empire .
Worse yet , the Ottomans began war with Russia over Bulgarian independence .
In the 1878 Congress of Berlin , Romania , Serbia , and Montenegro gained complete independence .
Bulgaria remained a vassal of the Ottoman Empire .
The British took Cyprus and , in 1882 , Egypt .
In 1908 , the Ottomans underwent a revolution by the Young Turks .
Abdul Hamid II abdicated and Mehmed V was instated .
Bulgaria gained independence and Austria invaded Bosnia in that same year .
In 1912 , the Ottomans lost Libya to the Italians .
The ensuing Balkan Wars saw the Ottomans lose all of its European territories but Eastern Thrace to a combined force of Serbia , Montenegro , Greece , and Bulgaria .
The Second Balkan War allowed the Ottomans to attack Bulgaria in conjunction with Romania , Serbia , Montenegro , and Greece .
Their victory meant little .
Unrest continued with a 1909 countercoup to the Young Turk coup and three subsequent countercoups to that 1909 coup .
In 1914 , utterly disorganized , the Ottomans declared war on Russia .
Britain and France went to war with the Ottomans , and World War I had come to Turkey .
Early Ottoman conduct in the war was actually not completely objectionable .
The Battle of Gallipoli was won by the Ottomans in part because of the complete incompetence of the British commanders .
was also won by the Ottomans , even though it was lost later .
In 1915 , the Armenian Genocide , one of the worst mass killings in history , began .
Armenians , Assyrians , Greeks , and others were targeted .
As many as million of these peoples died .
The Ottoman Empire crumbled upon itself after the Arabs revolted in 1916 with British help .
The Ottomans fell after the Sinai , Palestine , Iraq , Syria , and eventually Anatolia itself fell .
The Ottomans surrendered in 1918 .
The Turkish War of Independence was fought against the Sultan , Greece , Armenia , France , Britain , and Italy .
The Turkish national movement won under Mustafa Kemal Atatürk , and the Republic of Turkey was founded .
In 1923 , the Ottoman Empire ceased to exist .
== Sultan family ==
The empire was a hereditary monarchy .
The ruler title was .
In the early years of the empire , shahzadahs , the sons of the Sultan , were sent to different parts of the empire ( Sanjaks ) to get experience of governing .
Later they might be candidates for the Sultanate and Caliphate .
After Ahmed this system changed .
In the new system the Sultan would keep his male relatives locked in a small apartment called a kafes where they would never be able to see the outside world , and would therefore be unable to take power from him .
Often , a new Sultan would have his male relatives killed , a simpler solution since it removed competition for the Sultanate and prevented rebel movements .
However , the women in his harem often sought greater status and influence , and the Sultan mother might become a powerful political force in the Empire .
Each mother in the harem would try to make her own son the next Sultan , since they knew he would probably be killed if he was not .
The Sultans gradually lost their ability to govern territories well .
Distant governors did whatever they wanted and made their own laws instead of obeying the Sultan .
By its end , the Ottoman Empire grew so worn out and corrupt that it was ready to collapse .
== Capital ==
Bursa was the first capital of the Ottoman Empire .
Edirne in Thrace became the capital city of the Ottoman Empire in 1365 , until Istanbul was conquered by the Turks and became the empire final capital .
== Vassal states ==
Many places were vassal states to the empire rather than being directly ruled .
These included Transylvania , Moldavia , Wallachia , ( which would become Romania ) , Caucasus ( Georgia , Dagestan , and Chechnya ) .
Their rulers received a degree of independence and autonomy from the Ottoman Empire .
The price for this autonomy was more money ( tax or tribute ) paid to the Sultan .
== References ==
== Other websites ==
The Ottoman Empire : A Chronogical Outline The Ottoman Empire : The Eternal State Ottoman Website History of Turkish Empire gives detailed timetable .
Turkish Oral Narrative Information about Ottomans Forced population transfers in early Ottoman imperial policy - covers the period Turkey in Asia is an old book in English from 1920 Ottoman Empire Citizendium
