A tropical cyclone is a circular air movement that starts over the warm ocean waters in the warm part of Earth near the Equator .
Most tropical cyclones create fast winds and great rains .
While some tropical cyclones stay out in the sea , others pass over land .
They can be dangerous because of flooding and because the winds pick up objects , including things as big as small boats .
Tropical cyclones can throw these things at high speeds .
Tropical cyclones , hurricanes or typhoons form when convection causes warm , moist air above the ocean to rise .
They begin as a group of storms when the water gets as hot as 80 ( 27 ) or hotter .
The Coriolis effect made by the Earth rotation causes the winds to rotate .
Warm air rises quickly .
Tropical cyclones usually move westward in the tropics , and can later move north or south into the temperate zone .
The eye of the storm is the center .
It has little rain or wind .
The eye wall has the heaviest rain and the fastest winds .
It is surrounded by rain bands which also have fast winds .
Tropical cyclones are powered by warm , humid ocean air .
When they go onto land , they weaken .
They die when they spend a long time over land or cool ocean water .
== Tropical cyclone , typhoon or hurricane == The term tropical cyclone is a summary term .
In various places tropical cyclones have other local names such as hurricane and typhoon .
A tropical cyclone that forms in the Atlantic Ocean is called a hurricane .
The word hurricane is also used for those that form in the eastern , central and northern Pacific .
In the western Pacific a tropical cyclone is called a typhoon .
In the Indian Ocean it is called a cyclone .
== Naming ==
Tropical cyclones are usually given names because it helps in forecasting , locating , and reporting .
They are named once they have steady winds of 62 .
Committees of the World Meteorological Organization pick names .
Once named , a cyclone is usually not several hundred years hurricanes were named after saints .
In 1887 , Australian meteorologist Clement Wragge began giving women names to tropical cyclones .
He thought of history and mythology for names .
When he used men names , they were usually of politicians he hated .
By World War II cyclone names were based on the phonetic alphabet ( Able , Baker , Charlie ) .
In 1953 the United States stopped using phonetic names and began using female names for these storms .
This ended in 1978 when both male and female names were used for Pacific storms .
In 1979 this practice was added for hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic .
== Impact ==
In the past these storms sank many ships .
Better weather forecasting in the 20th century helped most ships avoid them .
When tropical cyclones reach land , they may break things .
Sometimes they kill people and destroy cities .
In the last 200 years , about million people have been killed by tropical cyclones .
Wind can cause up to 83 of the total damages of a storm .
Broken wreckage from destroyed objects can become deadly flying pieces .
Flooding can also occur when a lot of rain falls when storm surges push water onto the is a possibility of indirect deaths after a tropical cyclone passes .
For example , New Orleans , Louisiana suffered from poor health conditions after Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005 .
== Classifications ==
Tropical cyclones are classified into different categories by their strength and location .
The National Hurricane Center , which observes hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean and Eastern and Central Pacific Ocean , classifies them using the Hurricane Scale .
Tropical cyclones in other places such as the Western Pacific Ocean or the Southern Hemisphere are classified on scales that are quite a bit like the Scale .
For example ; if a tropical storm in the western Pacific reaches winds , it is then officially called a typhoon .
A tropical depression is an organized group of clouds and thunderstorms with a clear circulation in air near the ocean and maximum continuing winds of less than 17 ( 33 kt , 38 mph , or 62 ) .
It has no eye and does not usually have the spiral shape that more powerful storms have .
Only the Philippines are known to name tropical depressions .
A tropical storm is an organized system of strong thunderstorms with a very clear surface circulation and continuing winds between 17 and 32 ( kt , mph , or ) .
At this point , the cyclonic shape starts to form , although an eye does not usually appear in tropical storms .
Most tropical cyclone agencies start naming cyclonic storms at this level , except for the Philippines which have their own way of naming cyclones .
A hurricane or typhoon or a cyclone is a large cyclonic weather system with continuing winds of at least 33 ( 64 kt , 74 mph , or 118 ) .
A tropical cyclone with this wind speed usually develops an eye , which is an area of calm conditions at the center of its circulation .
The eye is often seen from space as a small , round , spot .
Around the eye is the eye wall , an area where the strongest thunderstorms and winds spin around the storm center .
The fastest possible continuing wind speed found in tropical cyclones is thought to be around 85 ( 165 kt , 190 mph , 305 ) .
== Related pages ==
Weather Climate Natural disaster Typhoon Tip == Notes ==
