The Atlantic Ocean is the world second largest ocean .
It covers a total area of about square kilometres ( square miles ) .
It covers about 20 percent of the Earth surface .
It is named after the god Atlas from Greek mythology .
Its name means Sea of Atlas .
== Geologic history ==
The Atlantic formed when the Americas moved west from Eurasia and Africa .
This began sometime in the Cretaceous period , roughly 135 million years ago .
It was part of the of the supercontinent east coast of South America is shaped somewhat like the west coast of Africa , and this gave a clue that continents moved over long periods of time ( continental drift ) .
The Atlantic Ocean is still growing now , because of spreading from the Ridge , while the Pacific Ocean is said to be shrinking because the sea floor is folding under itself or subducting into the mantle .
== Geography ==
The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South America .
It connects to the Arctic Ocean through the Denmark Strait , Greenland Sea , Norwegian Sea and Barents Sea .
It connects with the Mediterranean Sea through the Strait of the southeast , the Atlantic merges into the Indian Ocean .
The East meridian defines its the southwest , the Drake Passage connects it to the Pacific Ocean .
The Panama Canal links the Atlantic and Atlantic Ocean is second in size to the Pacific .
It occupies an area of about square kilometres ( sq mi ) .
The volume of the Atlantic , along with its adjacent seas ( the seas next to it ) , is cubic average depth of the Atlantic , along with its adjacent seas , is metres ( fathoms ; ft ) .
The greatest depth is Milwaukee Deep near Puerto Rico , where the Ocean is metres ( fathoms ; ft ) deep .
=== Gulf Stream ===
The Atlantic Ocean has important ocean currents .
One of these , called the Gulf Stream , flows across the North Atlantic .
Water gets heated by the sun in the Caribbean Sea and then moves northwest toward the North Pole .
This makes France , Ireland , Britain , Iceland , and Norway in Europe much warmer in winter than Newfoundland and Nova Scotia in Canada .
Without the Gulf Stream , the climates of northeast Canada and northwest Europe might be the same , because these places are about the same distance from the North are currents in the South Atlantic too , but the shape of this sea means that it has less effect on South Africa .
== Geology ==
The main feature of the Atlantic Ocean seabed is a large underwater mountain chain called the Ridge .
It runs from north to south under the Ocean .
This is at the boundary of four tectonic plates : Eurasian , North American , South American and African .
The ridge extends from Iceland in the north to about salinity of the surface waters of the open ocean ranges from parts per thousand and varies with latitude and season .
== References ==
== Other websites ==
LA Times special Altered Oceans Oceanography Image of the Day , from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration NOAA Ocean Data Viewer Plot and download ocean observations CIA World Factbook information about Atlantic Ocean Oceans at the Open Directory Project
