The Solar System is the Sun and all the objects that orbit around it .
The Sun is orbited by planets , asteroids , comets and other things .
The Solar System is about billion years old .
It formed by gravity in a large molecular cloud .
Most of this matter gathered in the center , and the rest flattened into an orbiting disk that became the Solar System .
It is thought that almost all stars form by this process .
The Sun is a star .
It contains of the Solar System mass .
This means that it has strong gravity .
The other objects are pulled into orbit around the Sun .
The Sun is mostly made out of hydrogen , and some helium .
There are eight planets in the Solar System .
From closest to farthest from the Sun , they are : Mercury , Venus , Earth , Mars , Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus and Neptune .
The first four planets are called terrestrial planets .
They are mostly made of rock and metal , and they are mostly solid .
The last four planets are called gas giants .
This is because they are much larger than other planets and are mostly made of gas .
The Solar System also contains other things .
There are asteroid belts , mostly between Mars and Jupiter .
Further out than Neptune , there is the Kuiper belt and the scattered disc .
These areas have dwarf planets , including Pluto , MakeMake , Haumea , Ceres and Eris .
There are thousands of very small objects in these areas .
There are also comets , centaurs , and there is interplanetary dust .
Six of the planets and three of the dwarf planets are orbited by moons .
Furthermore , planetary dust orbits the gas giants .
Many other systems like the Solar System have been found .
Each of the billions of stars in the Milky Way galaxy might have a planetary system .
== Evolution of the Solar System ==
The formation and evolution of the Solar System began billion years ago with the gravitational collapse of a small part of a giant molecular of the collapsing mass collected in the centre , forming the Sun , while the rest flattened into a protoplanetary disk of loose dust , out of which the planets , moons , asteroids , and other Solar System bodies formed .
This model , known as the nebular hypothesis , was developed in the 18th ( 1700s ) century by Emanuel Swedenborg , Immanuel Kant , and Laplace .
It has been adjusted by scientific disciplines such as astronomy , physics , geology , and planetary science .
As our knowledge of space has grown , the models have been changed to account for the new observations .
The Solar System has evolved considerably since its initial formation .
Many moons have formed from circling discs of gas and dust around their parent planets , while other moons are believed to have formed and were later captured by their planets .
Still others , as the Earth Moon , may be the result of giant collisions .
Many collisions between bodies have occurred , and have been important to the evolution of the Solar System .
In the early stages , the positions of the planets sometimes shifted , and planets have switched places .
This planetary migration is thought to have been responsible for much of the Solar System early evolution .
== Earth orbit ==
The Earth orbit around the Sun is nearly a perfect circle , but when mapped it is found that the Earth moves around the Sun in a very slightly oval shaped orbit , called an elliptical orbit .
The other planets in the Solar System also orbits the Sun in slightly elliptical orbits .
Mercury has a more elliptical orbit than the others , and some of the smaller objects orbit the Sun in very eccentric orbits .
== Discovery and exploration ==
For thousands of years , people had no need for a name for the Solar System .
They thought the Earth stayed still at the center of everything ( geocentrism ) .
Although the Greek philosopher Aristarchus of Samos suggested that there was a special order in the sky , Nicolaus Copernicus was the first to develop a mathematical system that described what we now call the solar system .
This was called a new system of the world .
In the 17th century , Galileo Galilei , Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton began helping people understand physics more clearly .
People began to accept the idea that the Earth is a planet and moves around the Sun , and that the planets are worlds with the same physical laws that control Earth .
More recently , telescopes and space probes have led to discoveries of mountains and craters , and seasonal meteorological phenomena such as clouds , dust storms and ice caps on the other planets .
== The eight planets ==
In their order from the Sun : Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus NeptuneThe planets are the biggest objects that go around the Sun .
It took people many years of using telescopes to find the objects that were farthest away .
New planets might still be found , and more small objects are found every year .
Most of the planets have moons that orbit around them just as the planets orbit the Sun .
There are at least 173 of these moons in the solar system .
== Dwarf planets ==
Pluto had been called a planet since it was discovered in 1930 , but in 2006 astronomers meeting at the International Astronomical Union decided on the definition of a planet , and Pluto did not fit .
Instead they defined a new category of dwarf planet , into which Pluto did fit , along with some others .
These small planets are sometimes called plutinos .
Pluto Ceres Haumea Eris Makemake == Structure ==
There are a few main parts of the Solar System .
Here they are in order from the Sun , with the planets numbered , and the dwarf planets marked with the letters a - === Inner solar system ===
The first four planets closest to the Sun are called the inner planets .
They are small and dense terrestrial planets , with solid surfaces .
They are made up of mostly rock and metal with a distinct internal structure and a similar size .
Three also have an atmosphere .
The study of the four planets gives information about geology outside the Earth .
Most asteroids are also often counted with the inner planets Terrestrial planets region contains the four planets closest to the sun , all are rocky planets ( 1 ) Mercury ( 2 ) Venus ( 3 ) Earth ( 4 ) MarsAsteroid belt region contains ; ( a ) Ceres ( the only dwarf planet in this region ) Asteroids 
=== Outer solar system ===
Gas giant planets region contains ; ( 5 ) Jupiter ( 6 ) Saturn ( 7 ) Uranus ( 8 ) Neptune === region ===
Kuiper belt region contains ; ( b ) Pluto ( c ) Haumea ( d ) Makemake Kuiper belt objects and possibly other dwarf planets cometsscattered disc region contains ; ( e ) Eris Scattered disk objects and possibly other dwarf planets 
=== Oort Cloud ===
The Oort cloud is separate from the region , and much farther out .
It contains the comets .
== Ecliptic plane ==
The plane of the ecliptic is defined by the Earth orbit around the Sun .
All of the planets orbit the Sun roughly around this same orbital plane .
The farther away from this plane a planet orbits , the more inclined is its orbit to the ecliptic .
If you could look at the solar system edge on then all the planets would be orbiting more or less in the plane of the ecliptic .
== References ==
== More reading ==
Lang , Kenneth ( 2011 ) .
The Cambridge guide to the Solar System ( 2nd ed . ) .
Cambridge University Press .
ISBN 9780521198578 == Other websites ==
Views of the Solar System Your Weight on Other Worlds Solar System Citizendium
