For the historical people of Israel , see State of Israel is a country in southwestern Asia on the eastern side of the Mediterranean Sea .
Israel became an independent country in 1948 .
Israel is the only Jewish country , and Jews all over the world think of Israel as their spiritual home .
Israel population was million people in 2013 and million are Jewish .
Almost all the other citizens of Israel are Arab ( million ) and include Muslims , Christians , Druze , and Samaritans .
Israel largest city is Jerusalem .
Israel capital city is Jerusalem ( limited recognition ) .
Most countries keep embassies in Tel Aviv .
Israel is a small country , but it has mountains , deserts , shores , valleys and plains .
The climate is hot and rainless in the summers with high humidity in the coastal plain and lower elevations , and cool and rainy in the winters , rarely going below freezing temperatures .
Israel has few natural resources and imports more goods than it exports .
It has a relatively high standard of living and life expectancy .
Almost all of its people can read and write .
According to the Democratic Index , Israel is the only democratic republic in the Middle East .
According to Freedom House , both Israel and Tunisia are the only full democracies in the Greater Middle East .
== History ==
The country history goes back thousands of years , to ancient times .
Two world religions , Judaism and Christianity , began here .
It is the place where the Jewish nation and religion first grew .
Jews and Christians call it the Holy Land , because it is the place of many events described in the Bible , and because some commandments of Jewish law can be accomplished only on its soil .
=== Premodern ===
From the time of the first Jewish patriarch Abraham four thousand years ago , the land now called Israel were populated by Canaanites and other Semitic peoples .
Around 1400 BCE , another Semitic people , called the Hebrews , settled in Canaan under the leadership of Moses and Joshua .
They were named the Children of Israel or Israelites : which were divided into 12 tribes .
A few centuries later , the Hebrews made Saul , as their leader .
The next king , David , began the Kingdom of Israel in about 1000 BCE and made the city of Jerusalem his capital .
His son , Solomon , built the first Temple for the worship of their God .
Solomon died in about 928 BCE .
His kingdom broke into two countries .
The northern country kept the name Israel .
The southern country , called Judah , kept Jerusalem as its capital .
The Assyrians conquered the Kingdom of Israel in 732 BCE and the Babylonians conquered the Kingdom of Judah in 586 BCE and destroyed Solomon Temple .
Many Jews returned from Babylonia and built a country again and rebuilt the Temple .
First the Persians , then the Greeks and then the Romans ruled the Land of Israel .
The Jews fought against the Romans but the Romans defeated them .
In 70 CE , the Romans destroyed Jerusalem and the Second Jewish Temple there .
Again , in 135 CE , the Romans defeated the Jews and killed or took many of them to other places .
The number of Jews living in Israel became much smaller .
Many were forced to live in other countries .
This spreading of Jewish communities outside of Israel is called the Diaspora .
Many of the Jews who remained moved to the Galilee .
Jewish teachers wrote important Jewish books , called the Mishnah and part of the Talmud there , in the 2nd to 4th centuries CE .
The Romans began to call this region by the word that became Palestine in English .
The Roman and then the Byzantine empires ruled until 635 CE , when Arabs conquered the region .
Different Arab rulers , and for a while Crusaders , ruled the land .
In 1516 , the Ottoman Empire conquered the land and ruled the region until the 20th century .
=== Modern ===
Since the Diaspora , there have been many attempts to make a new homeland for the Jewish people .
In the 1880s , this wish for a Jewish nation in Israel became a movement called Zionism .
Jews from all over the world began to come to the area and settled in desert zones , then governed by the Turkish and later by the British Governments .
On 14 May 1948 , British control over Palestine ended .
The Jewish inhabitants ( under the leadership of David ) declared independence for the new Jewish state .
Immediately following Israel declaration of independence , the armies of several nearby countries including Egypt , Syria , Jordan , and Iraq attacked the new country .
Since the 1980s , Israel main military opponents have been Islamist groups , such as Hezbollah .
== Geography ==
The countries of Lebanon and Syria are to the north of Israel ; Jordan is on the east ; and Egypt is to the southwest .
Israel also controls the West Bank of the Jordan River .
Israel has a long coastline on the Mediterranean Sea .
In the south , the town of Eilat is on the Gulf of Aqaba , which is part of the Red Sea .
The Galilee is a fertile and mountainous region in the north .
There is a flat plain called the Coastal Plain to the west , near the coast of the Mediterranean Sea .
The Negev Desert is a barren area of flat plains , mountains , and craters in the south .
There is a range of mountains in the center that runs from the north to south .
On the eastern side , there is a low area called a depression .
The Hula Valley and the Sea of Galilee are in this low area in the north .
The Jordan River runs from the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea .
The land next to the Dead Sea is the lowest in the world .
It is meters below sea weather is normally hot and dry in the summer and mild to cool in the winter .
Rain falls mostly in the winter ( between the months of November and April ) .
There is more rain in the north than in the south , and hardly any rain in the desert .
Snow falls in higher elevations .
Israel built a very big irrigation system to bring water from the north to the dry areas in the south so that crops can grow there is the biggest city in Israel .
Tel Aviv , Haifa , Beersheba and Rishon LeZion are also large cities .
Israel says that its capital city is Jerusalem .
Most countries do not recognize that .
They treat Tel Aviv as the capital .
== Government ==
=== National government ===
Israel is a parliamentary democracy .
All Israeli citizens who are 18 years or older may vote .
The Israeli parliament is called the Knesset .
The Knesset has 120 members .
Each member is elected for no more than four years at a time .
The Knesset makes laws , helps decide national policy , and approves budgets and taxes .
Voters do not vote for individual candidates in Knesset elections .
Instead , they vote for a party .
This party makes a list with all its candidates .
The list may have only one candidate or as many as 120 candidates .
In an election , the percentage of the vote that each list wins decides how many representatives , or seats , the party gets in the Knesset .
For example , if a party list gets 33 percent of the vote , it gets 40 Knesset seats .
Israel has no written constitution .
Instead , the Knesset made Basic Laws .
The Basic Laws say how the government must work and give civil rights to the citizens .
The Prime Minister is the head of Israel government .
He or she is usually the leader of the party that has the most seats in the Knesset .
The prime minister must keep the support of a majority of Knesset members to stay in office .
He or she appoints ministers to the cabinet .
The Knesset approves appointments to the Cabinet .
The ministers are responsible for subjects such as education , defense , and social welfare .
The prime minister is the head of the cabinet and decides the topics of cabinet meetings and makes the final decisions .
Benjamin Netanyahu has been the Prime Minister since March 2009 .
The President is the head of state .
The Knesset elects the president for seven years .
Most of the president duties are ceremonial : The president signs laws and treaties approved by the Knesset , appoints judges , and members of some public organizations .
He or she also accepts the documents from ambassadors and foreign diplomats bring when they are appointed .
Reuven Rivlin has been the President since July 2014 .
=== Politics ===
Israel has many political parties , with a large variety of opinions .
In the elections of 2020 , 20 parties won seats in the Knesset .
The parties belong to three main groups .
The biggest groups are the Zionist parties .
These include the conservative liberals , such as HaLikud ; social democrats , such as HaAvoda ( Labor Party ) ; and the religious Zionists .
There are also smaller religious Orthodox Jewish parties , parties , and Israeli Arab parties .
A single party usually does not win enough seats in the Knesset by itself to have a majority , so one of the bigger parties asks for support from the other parties , including the religious parties , to form a coalition government .
This gives these parties a lot of power although they are small .
The Likud supports free market policies and limited government involvement in the economy .
Likud believes strongly in protecting Israel security .
It wants to give less away in the peace process for a negotiated agreement with the Palestinians and the Arab states .
The Labor Party supports government control of the economy , but also believes in a limited amount of free enterprise .
The party says it will give more away for an agreement with the Palestinians and the Arab states .
Current Knesset is the 23rd Knesset , sworn in on March 16 , 2020 .
Current government is the Fifth Netanyahu Government , installed on May 17 , 2020 .
== Economy ==
At independence , Israel was a poor country with little agricultural or industrial production .
But Israel economy has grown tremendously since 1948 .
The nation now enjoys a relatively high standard of living , despite having few natural resources and a limited water supply .
Many immigrants came to Israel in the years immediately after independence .
Many of these immigrants were skilled laborers and professionals who greatly aided the nation economic development .
=== Service industries ===
Many of Israel service industry workers are employed by the government or by businesses owned by the government .
Government workers provide many of the services that are needed by Israel large immigrant population , such as housing , education , and job training .
=== Tourism ===
Tourism is one of the country important sources of income .
Tourists visit many archaeological , historical , and religious sites ; museums ; nature reserves ; and beach resorts in support many of Israel service industries , especially trade , restaurants , and hotels .
Over million foreign tourists visited Israel in 2009 .
=== Manufacturing ===
Israeli factories produce such goods as chemical products , electronic equipment , fertilizer , paper , plastics , processed foods , scientific and optical instruments , textiles , and clothing .
The cutting of imported diamonds is a major industry .
plants manufacture equipment used by Israel large armed forces .
Israel is the world largest exporter of drones .
Tel Aviv and Haifa are Israel major manufacturing centers .
=== Agriculture ===
Agriculture formerly employed a much larger percentage of Israel workforce .
But much of the work once performed by people is now performed by machines .
Important agricultural products include citrus and other fruits ; eggs ; grain ; poultry ; and vegetables .
The government develops , helps finance , and controls agricultural activity , including fishing and forestry .
Israel produces most of the food it needs to feed its people , except for grain .
Agricultural exports provide enough income to pay for any necessary food imports .
Most Israeli farmers use modern agricultural methods .
Water drawn from the Sea of Galilee irrigates large amounts of land in Israel .
Most Israeli farms are organized as moshavim or kibbutzim .
Israel also has some private farms .
=== Mining ===
The Dead Sea , the world saltiest body of water , is Israel leading source of minerals .
Bromine , magnesium , potash and table salt are extracted from the sea .
Potash , used mainly in fertilizers , is the most important mineral .
In the Negev Desert , there are mines for phosphates , copper , clay , and gypsum .
=== Energy ===
Israel has few energy sources .
It has no coal deposits or hydroelectric power resources , and only small amounts of crude oil and natural gas .
As a result , Israel depends on imported crude oil for gasoline and diesel for transportation , and coal producing electricity for its energy needs .
Solar energy energy from the sun is used widely to heat water for houses .
Israel is developing other ways to use solar energy to power houses and factories .
In 2008 , Israel began investing in building electric cars and the stations to charge them .
There may also be large natural gas fields in the Mediterranean Sea that Israel could develop .
=== International trade ===
For 2006 , Israeli exports grew by 11 to just over 29 billion ; the sector accounted for 14 billion , a 20 increase from the previous year .
Because it has few natural resources , Israel imports more goods than it exports .
The country main imports include chemicals , computer equipment , grain , iron and steel , military equipment , petroleum products , rough diamonds , and textiles .
Israel main exports are chemical products , citrus fruits , clothing , electronic equipment , fertilizers , polished diamonds , military equipment , and processed foods .
The nation main trading partners include the Benelux countries ( Belgium , the Netherlands , and Luxembourg ) ; Germany ; Italy ; Switzerland ; the United Kingdom ; and the United States .
=== Transportation ===
Israel has a transportation system .
Most Israeli families either own a car or have one provided by their employer .
Paved roads reach almost all parts of the country .
Public transportation both in and between cities is provided primarily by bus .
Airport is Israel main international airport .
It is near Tel Aviv .
There are smaller airports are located at Atarot , near Jerusalem , and at Eilat .
El Al , Israel international airline , flies regularly to the United States , Canada , Europe , and parts of Africa and Asia .
Israel has three major deepwater ports : Haifa , Ashdod , and Eilat .
=== Communications ===
Israel communication system is one of the best in the Middle East .
Israel has about 30 daily newspapers , about half of which are in Hebrew .
The rest are in Arabic , Russian , Yiddish , or one of several foreign languages .
The Israel Broadcasting Authority , a public corporation set up by the government , runs the television and nonmilitary radio stations .
== Related pages ==
Israel at the Olympics Israel national football team List of rivers of Israel == References ==
== Other websites ==
Israel Government Portal ( English ) Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( English ) Israel Breaking News , News from Israel and the Middle East , updated daily .
Daily News , Breaking News : World , USA , Europe , Asia and Israel .
Haaretz Daily Newspaper , News from Israel in English .
Israel national news , News from Israel in English .
A Brief History of the Jewish people State of Israel
