The Big Bang Theory is an American television sitcom .
It was created and executive produced by Chuck Lorre and Bill Prady .
It was first shown on CBS on September 24 , 2007 .
== Overview ==
The show starts by being centred on two male Caltech scientists who share an apartment in Pasadena , California .
They are in their twenties and are both single for the first two seasons .
One is an experimental physicist from New Jersey ( Leonard Hofstadter ) .
The other is a theoretical physicist from Texas ( Sheldon Cooper ) .
Sheldon has Asperger syndrome and personality disorder and has a very low sex drive .
They live across the hall from an attractive , waitress from Nebraska ( Penny ) .
She is single and lives on her own for most of the show run .
She tried to become an actress , but only got a role in a television advertisement and a role in a called Serial Apeist as well as its sequel .
Leonard and Sheldon geekiness and intellect are contrasted with Penny social skills , popularity and lively sex life for comedic effect .
Two equally geeky , single friends of Sheldon and Leonard , Jewish Howard and Indian Rajesh , are also main characters .
Howard lived with his mother during the first few seasons .
Raj lives on his own .
The show is produced by Warner Television and Chuck Lorre Productions .
In March 2014 , it was announced that The Big Bang Theory would continue for at least three more seasons on show began as a sitcom about four geeky , male scientists and their , , socially successful waitress neighbour .
Much of the humor revolved around the differences between scientists and the rest of the characters , especially Penny .
From season 3 onwards , the show changed greatly into being a show about couples and families .
Bernadette Rostenkowski was brought in during season 3 and started a relationship with Howard .
The couple later married and had a daughter .
Amy was also brought in during season 3 and started a relationship with Sheldon ; they later got engaged .
Leonard and Penny became a couple and married .
The show frequently shuffles between romantic comedy and relationship seasons have been shown .
The show twelfth season was its last .
A prequel series , Young Sheldon , began in 2017 .
== Cast ==
=== Main ===
Johnny Galecki as Leonard Leakey Hofstadter , Jim Parsons as Sheldon Cooper , Kaley Cuoco as Penny Simon Helberg as Howard Wolowitz , .
Kunal Nayyar as Rajesh Koothrappali , Kevin Sussman as Stuart John Ross Bowie as Barry Kripke Melissa Rauch as Bernadette Rostenkowski Mayim Bialik as Amy === === Deborah Debbie Wolowitz ( voiced by Carol Ann Susi ( seasons ) ) Leslie Winkle ( played by Sara Gilbert ( seasons 1 and 3 ) ) == Series overview ==
== Production history ==
The show was first developed for the television season .
At that time , it was very different from the show that was later broadcast .
Only Jim Parsons Johnny Galecki were part of the original pilot .
The character now played by Kaley Cuoco was much meaner to the geeks .
CBS did not pick the show up , but gave Bill Prady and Chuck Lorre a second chance .
They brought in Kaley Cuoco , Simon Helberg and Kunal Nayyar .
They retooled the second pilot of The Big Bang Theory was directed by television directing veteran James Burrows .
He decided not to stay with the show .
This reworked pilot led to a order by CBS on May 14 , 2007 .
Before its airing on CBS , the pilot episode was distributed on iTunes free of charge .
The show premiered September 24 , 2007 .
It was picked up for a full season order on October 19 , on the show was halted on November 6 , 2007 by the Writers Guild of America strike .
When the strike ended , the show was picked up for a second season for the television show returned on March 17 , 2008 .
It had an earlier time slot and nine new episodes .
The second season premiered , in the same slot , on September 22 , 2008 .
During that season , the show ratings grew .
That led to a renewal through the Saltzberg , a professor of physics and astronomy at the University of California , Los Angeles , checks scripts and provides dialogue , math equations and diagrams used as props .
He says he is more consultant than contributor .
Executive Bill Prady said , In fact , we working on giving Sheldon an actual problem that he going to be working on throughout the [ first ] season so there actual progress to the boards We worked hard to get all the science right .
== Theme song ==
Barenaked Ladies wrote and recorded the theme song , which describes developments the universe has undergone since the dawn of time .
On October 9 , 2007 , a ( 1 minute and 45 second ) version of the song was released .
== releases ==
Despite the third and fourth seasons receiving releases with their DVD releases , the first and second seasons were only available on DVD when they were released .
Warner has then released the first two seasons on combo packs with UltraViolet downloads on July 10 , 2012 .
All of the episodes from seasons 1 2 on received newly edited audio , with the first season including a gag reel , which was not included during the initial first season DVD release .
== Ratings ==
=== standard ratings ===
In the following summary , rating is the percentage of all households with televisions that tuned to the show , and share is the percentage of all televisions in use at that time that are tuned in .
is the percentage of all adults aged tuned into the show .
Viewers is the number of viewers , in millions , watching at the time .
Rank is how well the show did compared to other TV shows aired that week .
=== Seasonal ratings ===
Seasonal ratings based on average total viewers per episode of The Big Bang Theory on CBS : === UK distribution and ratings ===
The show made its UK debut on Channel 4 on February 14 , 2008 bringing in an average audience of million viewers .
The second episode , shown the following week , also received million .
For the third episode an average of million tuned in .
The show is also shown as a on Channel 4 digital offshoot E4 the preceding evening , and brings in viewers on average .
The 5th episode received viewers .
After the first 5 episodes , the average number of viewers continues to hover around the 1 million mark .
Episode 13 was watched by million viewers and was the most watched December 2008 , Virgin Media made the first nine episodes of the first season available to watch on its TV Choice On Demand service , and the rest of Season 1 was made available in January 2009 .
== International broadcast ==
The show is also broadcast in : Albania ( since April 19 , 2009 ) Argentina Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) Australia Nine Network ( Originally broadcast Early 2008 during the rating season , however due to low viewership the show was put on hiatus to be broadcast in the off season starting of November 19 , 2008 ) Belgium La Une ( since August 31 , 2008 ) Bolivia Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) Brazil Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) Bulgaria - Nova Television ( since November 5 , 2008 ) Canada CTV , A Peru Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) Chile Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) El Salvador Warner Channel ( since November , 2007 ) Colombia Warner Channel Costa Rica Warner Channel Cyprus - LTV Czech Republic Prima COOL ( since April 7 , 2009 ) Denmark ( Since January , 2009 ) Dominican Republic Warner Channel Ecuador Warner Channel Fiji - Mai TV Finland Sub ( since September 8 , 2008 ) France TPS Star ( since October 18 , 2008 ) Germany ProSieben ( since 2009 ) Guatemala Warner Channel Honduras Canal 5 Hong Kong ATV World ( 2011 ) Iceland Stöð 2 ( since August 19 , 2008 ) India Zee Cafe , Star World India Ireland RTÉ Two ( since July 11 , 2008 ) Israel yes stars Comedy ( since July , 2008 ) Italy Steel ( since January 19 , 2008 ) .
The show received a lot of criticism due to the poor quality of dubbing , which allegedly dumbed down most of the jokes .
Latin America Warner Channel Malaysia ntv7 Mexico Warner Channel Netherlands Veronica ( since March 2 , 2009 ) New Zealand TV2 ( since September 17 , 2008 ) Norway TVNorge Pakistan Zee Cafe Panama Warner Channel Paraguay Warner Channel Peru Warner Channel Philippines Jack TV 9 Poland TVN Siedem ( since November 20 , 2008 ) as wielkiego wybuchu poprawione przez Portugal SET and RTP2 ( since July 14 , 2008 ) Russia Paramount Comedy Russia Slovenia Kanal A ( since February 23 , 2009 ) as Veliki pokovci ( The Big Bangers ) South Africa Spain ( since June 12 , 2008 ) Sweden Kanal 5 Macedonia Kanal 5 Thailand True Series ( since May 26 , 2008 ) Trinidad and Tobago TV6 ( since 2008 ) Turkey ( since September 9 , 2008 ) Ukraine - Inter channel United Kingdom Channel 4 , E4 Uruguay Warner Channel Venezuela Warner Channel == References ==
== Other websites ==
The Big Bang Theory on IMDb The Big Bang Theory at The Big Bang Theory on Official Site for The Big Bang Theory on DVD Vanity Cards Archive for The Big Bang Theory
