How I Met Your Mother ( or HIMYM ) is an American situation comedy ( sitcom ) that started on CBS Broadcasting on September 19 , 2005 .
The story is set in New York City .
It is about a man named Ted Mosby who tells his son and daughter how he met their mother .
Ted is played by Josh Radnor and the story is narrated by Bob Saget who plays Ted Mosby in the future year 2030 .
Other characters and friends of Ted are Marshall Eriksen ( Jason Segel ) , Robin Scherbatsky ( Cobie Smulders ) , Barney Stinson ( Neil Patrick Harris ) , and Lily Aldrin ( Alyson Hannigan ) .
How I Met Your Mother is also said to be the inheritor of Friends another famous sitcom from 1994 to 2004 .
The 9th and final season started airing on September 23 , 2013 .
The show ended on March 31 , 2014 .
== Plot ==
A retelling of Ted Mosby ( Josh Radnor ) life before he met his wife ( Cristin Milioti ) , whom is telling his kids in the year 2030 , hence the title , I Met Your Mother .
The story focuses on Ted everyday life and relationships between his four best friends , Marshall Eriksen ( Jason Segel ) , Lily Auldren ( Alyson Hannigan ) , Barney Stinson ( Neil Patrick Harris ) and Robin Scherbatsky ( Cobie Smulders ) .
The show is mainly a comedy , along with scenes and tearful moments .
The show was loosely based on the lives of the show producers ; Carter Bays and Craig Thomas .
== Main Characters ==
Ted Mosby by Josh Radnor .
An architect , idiotically romantic .
A 30 years old man living in New York and is looking for true love .
All he wants to do is to find a wife , so he is always misled to do many stupid things by or with his friends , especially Barney .
Barney Stinson by Neil Patrick Harris .
A histrionic businessman , he has numerous ideas about how to get a girl , and frequently does .
Ted best friend .
The Playbook is his most prized possession .
Met with Ted in a bar named McLaren and become one of Ted friends .
Robin Scherbatsky by Cobie Smulders A Canadian TV reporter , journalist and newscaster .
A beautiful and elegant woman , but is slightly tomboyish , due to being raised as a boy by her father whom wanted a son .
Was Ted initial love interested , and became a major part of Ted personal life .
Marshall Eriksen by Jason Segel .
A lawyer , filled with honesty and justice .
A typical boy born in Minnesota , loves his mother , wants help the world by his work .
Ted best friend from college .
Lily Aldrin by Alyson Hannigan .
A kindergarten teacher , who studied art history in college .
Loves to paint .
Bright and bubbly , and ca keep a secret .
Became one of Ted best friends after she started dating Marshall , whom she married at the end of Season 2 .
The Mother by Cristin Milioti .
She was an Economics student in Colombia university ( where Ted teaches ) , she plays bass in a reggae band ( a major plot point of the story ) , and that she has been portrayed as girl with the yellow umbrella since the first season .
== By season ==
Season 1 : Ted meets Robin , started dating but blew it on the first one .
Marshall is engaged to Lily .
Ted meets Victoria , a baker , whom had to leave for Germany to continue her studies , thus they broke up .
Ted officially dates Robin , Lily left Marshall to pursue her dreams in the finale .
Season 2 : Ted and Robin have some conflicts about their marriage and about having children and broke up in the end .
Robin past was brought to light , where she was a teenage pop star called Robin Sparkles .
Lily and Marshall reconciles , and gets married in the finale .
Season 3 : Barney slept with Robin , both confused with their feelings .
Ted dates Stella , a Dermatologist .
He proposes to her near the finale .
Season 4 : Ted opens his own firm , Mosbius Design , but it later failed .
Barney finds out he loves Robin .
Ted was left at the altar , being one the biggest blows in his life .
Season 5 : Ted decides to teach architecture as a professor in college .
The playbook is introduced .
Season 6 : Ted gets to fulfill his dream ; to design a skyscraper in New York City for GNB .
Ted dates Zoe , the of an aristocrat , who was also against GNB on blowing up the Arcadian , making her also being against Ted , thus making their relationship very confusing and fragile .
Marshall father died from a heart attack .
Barney meets his real father .
Lily gets pregnant .
Season 7 : Robin and Barney relationship becomes more complicated and confusing .
The Tie deal .
Lily gives birth to baby Marvin in the finale .
Season 8 : Barney big and elaborate to propose to robin .
Ted building is finished .
Lily gets a second chance at an art career and Marshall received an offer to be a judge .
Ted decides to move to Chicago , in hopes to get away from Robin , whom he is afraid still harbor feelings for .
The mother is introduced in the finale .
Season 9 : Ted holds a blue French horn in the series finale .
== Other websites ==
Official Website How I Met Your Mother on IMDb How I Met Your Mother at == References ==
