Coffee is a plant ( Coffea ) and the name of the drink that is made from this plant .
The coffee plant is a bush or tree that can grow up to ten meters ( about 32 feet ) high , but is usually cut shorter .
Coffee plants originally grew in Africa , and now also grow in South America , Central America and Southeast Asia .
They are an important crop for the economies of many countries .
The first branded coffee to be sold commercially to the public was Nes Café in 1879 .
The drink is made from the seeds of the coffee plant , called coffee beans .
Coffee is usually served hot , and is a popular drink in many countries .
Coffee contains a chemical called caffeine , a mild drug that keeps people awake .
To make a drink from coffee beans , the beans must first be specially prepared by drying the beans and then roasting .
The beans are dried a short time after they are picked .
This preserves them and makes them ready to be packed or roasted .
Before the beans are made into a drink , they must be roasted or ground ( crushed into tiny pieces in a coffee mill ) .
When the ground coffee is placed into boiling water , the flavour and dark brown colour of the beans goes into the water .
Making coffee is called brewing coffee .
There are several different ways that coffee can be brewed .
== Coffee types ==
There are two main types of coffee plants .
The Coffea Arabica , the most common .
Most of the world coffee is made from Arabica beans , and the Coffea Robusta , which is easier to grow in places where Arabica will not grow .
Robusta is cheaper and has more caffeine than Arabica and it is used in many commercial coffee products .
But Robusta tastes bitter and acidic , so people only drink it with other things .
Better quality Robustas are in some espresso blends .
In the past , people gave names to new Arabica coffees from the port they came from .
The two oldest Arabica coffees are Mocha and Java .
Today , names are more specific .
They tell us the country , region , and sometimes even the property where they come from .
== Preparing coffee ==
=== Aging ===
Some sorts of coffee taste better if the beans are aged .
This means that after they are picked , the beans are dried and then kept from three to eight years .
This aging gives the coffee a less acidic taste .
Coffee that has been aged is often mixed or blended with other coffee that is not aged .
=== Roasting ===
Roasting is one of the important stages in making coffee beans into coffee .
When a coffee bean is roasted , it grows nearly two times bigger and changes from green to yellow to brown .
The length of time that the coffee beans are roasted makes the coffee taste different .
Some types of coffee , such as Mocha and Java , are roasted for a short time .
It is easy to tell from the flavour where the coffee is from .
When coffee is roasted for a long time , it is harder to tell the different types apart .
Green coffee beans can be bought and roasted at home in the oven .
=== Grinding ===
Before the coffee is made into a drink , it is ground in a small grinding machine called a coffee mill .
The coffee mill breaks the beans into very small pieces .
Coffee is turned into a drink in several different ways .
For some ways of making coffee , such as espresso it is best to have the coffee ground into fine powder but for other types of , such as filtered coffee , the coffee is in larger pieces to stop it going through the filter .
Finely ground coffee makes a stronger taste .
=== Brewing ===
Coffee is made into a drink by putting the coffee into boiling water .
This is called brewing coffee .
There are many ways to brew coffee .
Four of the most popular are : Boiling : The coffee and the water are put into a pot on top of the stove and boiled slowly together .
This way of making coffee has been used for hundreds of years .
It is the way that coffee is usually made in the Middle East , North Africa , Turkey and : The boiling water is forced through the ground coffee by a machine .
This type of coffee is called Espresso and the machine is called an Espresso machine or Coffee system .
Espresso machines are often found in cafes and restaurants .
Espresso is a very strong coffee that can be used to make other coffee : Filtered coffee is made by gravity because the boiling water falls from a machine onto the coffee .
The coffee grounds are held in a paper or metal filter that the water can run through , but the little coffee pieces can not .
The water becomes coloured and flavoured as it runs through the coffee and into a coffee : Boiling water is poured onto the coffee and it is allowed to stand for a little while , until the water has taken the colour and flavour .
This is often done in a cafetière , which is a tall glass or coffee pot which has a special filter inside that can be pushed down when the coffee is ready so that the person does not drink the coffee grounds .
Another way of steeping coffee is to have coffee grounds in a small packet , the right size to make one cup of coffee .
The packet is placed in the cup and water poured over it .
Then the packet is removed .
== How people drink their coffee ==
Black coffee is coffee with no milk in it .
White coffee is coffee with milk in it .
Café au lait is coffee made with a lot of hot milk .
It is often sweet .
Espresso is very strong coffee .
In Australia , it is often called a short black .
Cappuccino is espresso with frothed milk ( milk mixed with air ) .
A cappuccino should be made of strong coffee .
When the frothy milk is poured gently into the coffee cup , it should be white on top and have a ring of darker coffee around the edge .
Cappuccino coffee sometimes has cocoa sprinkled on top .
Latte is made like a cappuccino but with added milk and a very thin layer of foam .
Flat white is a double espresso where milk micro foam is added to the crema ( an emulsion of the oils in the coffee beans when combined with hot water that floats ) on the double espresso .
Americano is espresso with a lot of hot water .
Irish coffee is coffee with whiskey and with cream on the top .
Iced coffee is espresso in a tall glass with crushed ice , cold milk and ice cream .
Vietnamese style coffee ( Cafe Sua Da ) is filtered coffee poured over ice into a glass with sweet condensed milk ( thick milk which has had the water removed ) .
Frappé has multiple meanings .
It s a mix of instant coffee , milk , sugar , and foam .
Another from of the drink is blended frozen coffee .
And the last is a milkshake , thick milkshake .
== Instant coffee ==
Instant coffee is a very quick way to make a cup of coffee to drink .
It is made in a factory and sold in jars or packets .
First , strong coffee is made using ground coffee and boiling water .
Then , the coffee grounds are filtered out .
The coffee liquid is dried out until nothing is left except granules ( little crunchy pieces ) , or fine powder .
This is then put into jars or packets .
As soon as a spoonful of instant coffee is added to boiling water , it dissolves in the water to make coffee to drink .
The taste can be very different from fresh coffee .
Part of the reason for the different taste is that Robusta coffee beans are usually used for making instant coffee .
Robusta coffee beans do not cost as much as Arabica .
== When people drink coffee ==
The United States buys the most coffee ; Germany is next .
People in Finland drink the most coffee for each person .
In Canada , the United States and Europe , some restaurants sell mainly coffee ; they are referred to as cafés or coffeehouses .
Cafés often sell food , but the type of food is different from one country to another .
In some countries , for example , those in northern Europe , people like having coffee parties .
At these parties , people have coffee and cake .
In many countries , people drink coffee at work ; in the United States and England , for example , people drink it in the morning .
In other countries , such as Mexico , people drink it in the evening to help them stay awake .
== Health problems ==
Coffee contains the drug caffeine .
Caffeine is a mild stimulant which helps to keep people awake .
Caffeine , like many drugs , can be addictive and can cause health studies have looked at the health risks of coffee .
In February 2003 , there was a study in Denmark of women to find out if coffee had an effect on pregnancy and birth .
It was found that if a woman drank between four and seven cups of coffee a day , it did not seem to make a big change to the number of babies that were born dead , ( stillborn ) .
But the women in the study who drank eight or more cups of coffee a day had three times as much chance of having a stillborn this , and other reasons , some people drink coffee substitutes or decaffeinated coffee instead .
The BMJ quotes a study that concluded that there are health benefits for drinking up to four coffee cups per day .
However , drinking coffee is not recommended for pregnant women and for women who are in danger of fractured bones .
According to the BMJ not everyone agrees with these findings == Related pages ==
Infusion Tea Mate ( drink ) == References ==
== Other websites ==
Caffeine Withdrawal and Caffeine Content Chart - Help with caffeine addiction Coffee Conservation and Gourmet Coffee Facts - Resources on organic coffee Turkish coffee Kávéra Fel
Keurig Coffee - Facts Statistics of Keurig Coffee [ Infographic ]
