Slovakia ( Slovak : Slovensko ) ( Official name The Slovak Republic , Slovenská republika ) is a country with no access to the ocean in Central Europe .
It is bordered by Austria in the southwest , Hungary in the south , Ukraine in the east , Poland in the north and Czech Republic in the northwest .
Its capital city is Bratislava , the only capital of the world that borders with other two countries .
Other main cities are Košice , Prešov , Žilina , Banská Bystrica , Trenčín , Nitra and Trnava .
Slovakia has been a member of the European Union since 2004 and its official currency is the Euro .
== History ==
The Celts started to settle since 450 BC .
The coins named Biatec represent the first use of writing in Slovakia .
At the turn of millenniums , many different Germanic tribes like Quadi and Marcomanni started to overtake the area .
The Roman Empire established many outposts along the Danube river .
They even fought Germanic tribes , with the most northern presence being in Trenčín ( Laugaritio ) , during the Marcomannic Wars .
Great Moravia was at first in constant quarrels with the Eastern Francia , and at the beginning of the 10th century , with the Magyars who arrived from Asia .
The Magyars conquered Great Moravia in 906 , and established the Hungarian Principality , resulting later in the creation of the Kingdom of Hungary in year 1000 .
Slovaks continued to live in the north , while most Hungarians were in the south .
A huge population loss resulted from the Mongol invasions in 1241 .
The Hungarian kings started to invite other settlers , for example Germans in the 13th century , and many others started to arrive in the kingdom , Vlachs from Romania in the 14th century and Jews .
In the 16th century the Ottoman Empire occupied the southern part of the kingdom including the two most important towns , Buda ( capital ) and Székesfehérvár ( coronation capital ) .
Many Hungarian nobles moved to Slovakia and the king moved to Bratislava ( Pressburg , Pozsony at that time ) .
The wars against the Ottomans and an uprising against the Habsburgs caused much destruction .
After the Ottomans started to retreat back from Hungary , Bratislava continued to be capital until 1848 , when it was moved back to Budapest .
The creation of a dual monarchy , , enabled the Hungarian government to initiate a policy of suppressing the teaching of languages other than the Hungarian language in state schools .
The official use of other languages than Hungarian was also discouraged .
During this time , a nationalist movement arose among Slovakians .
A part of this movement joined forces with a part of the Czech nationalist movement .
During World War I , this movement convinced the future victorious powers to recognise a new state of Czechoslovakia after the war .
The territory of today Slovakia was a part of Czechoslovakia from 1918 to 1938 and again from 1945 until 1989 .
Czechoslovakia was one of the states which came into existence after the breakup of at end of World War I in 1918 .
Czechoslovakia split up in 1939 , when Slovakia , under Hitler influence and pressure , declared independence and became an independent state .
The state existed during World War II .
It was a totalitarian state which was a puppet ally of Nazi Germany .
Under the regime , the state fought in the war on the side of Nazi Germany and deported about of its Jewish citizens to Nazi extermination camps as part of the Holocaust .
The territory of Czechoslovakia was liberated by the Soviet Union at the end of World War II in 1945 .
After the liberation , Czechoslovakia was reunified and briefly existed as a democratic country .
The Communist Party successfully performed a state coup in 1948 and ruled Czechoslovakia as a totalitarian state which was a satellite of the Soviet Union .
In 1989 , the rule of the Communist Party was overthrown during the Velvet Revolution , which was a series of large and peaceful demonstrations by the citizens in the streets .
Czechoslovakia again became a democratic country .
However , it split up into two independent countries ( Slovakia and Czech Republic ) on January 1 , 1993 in what became known as the Velvet Divorce .
Slovakia has been a member of the European Union since May 1 , 2004 .
== Geography ==
Slovakia is landlocked .
It is noted primarily for its mountainous nature , with the Carpathian Mountains being in the north and various lowlands mostly in the south .
The highest mountain range are the Tatra mountains with the highest peak , the Gerlachov Peak ( Slovak : Gerlachovský štít ; m ) .
Major Slovak rivers besides the Danube are the Váh and Hron .
At low altitudes , Slovakia climate is humid continental ( Dfb in the Koeppen climate classification , with warm summers and cloudy , cold and humid winters .
At high altitudes it is subarctic and alpine .
== Demographics ==
About million people live in Slovakia .
Most people are Slovak ( 86 ) , but in southern regions of Slovakia live Hungarians ( 10 ) , with some municipalities even being with the Hungarian majority ( for example , Komárno or Dunajská Streda ) , Ruthenian or Ukrainian are spoken in the northeast .
A minority Roma population speak versions of the Romany language and are scattered mainly in the east .
The Slovak constitution guarantees a freedom of religion .
The majority of Slovaks are Roman Catholics ( 69 ) , the next are the atheists ( 13 ) .
Other religions include Lutheranism , Greek Orthodox and Calvinism .
There are about Muslims in Slovakia and Jews .
== Transport ==
Rail : Slovakia has km of rails , of which km are in standard gauge .
Rail network currently undergoes a modernisation .
Road : Slovakia has km of roads , of which 316 km are motorways ( 2003 ) .
The motorway network is currently under construction .
Air : Slovakia has 6 international airports , with the most important ones being in Bratislava and Košice , others are near Sliač , Poprad , Žilina and Piešťany .
Marine : Slovakia has no direct access to the sea .
The most important waterway is the Danube , with the ports in Bratislava and Komárno .
The Danube and the canal connects Slovakia to the North Sea and the Black Sea .
== Administrative division ==
There are currently 8 regions of Slovakia : Bratislava Region ( Bratislavský kraj ) ( capital Bratislava ) Trnava Region ( Trnavský kraj ) ( capital Trnava ) Trenčín Region ( Trenčiansky kraj ) ( capital Trenčín ) Nitra Region ( Nitriansky kraj ) ( capital Nitra ) Žilina Region ( Žilinský kraj ) ( capital Žilina ) Banská Bystrica Region ( Banskobystrický kraj ) ( capital Banská Bystrica ) Prešov Region ( Prešovský kraj ) ( capital Prešov ) Košice Region ( Košický kraj ) ( capital Košice ) These are further divided into many districts .
There are currently 79 districts of Slovakia .
== Related pages ==
List of rivers of Slovakia Slovakia at the Olympics Slovakia national football team Slovakia men national ice hockey team == References ==
== Other websites ==
The Slovak Republic Government Office
