Tokyo ( 東京 , Tōkyō , Eastern Capital ) is the capital and largest city of Japan located on the island of Honshu .
Tokyo is the center of the Japanese government .
The Imperial Palace is in Tokyo .
Tokyo is the center of business , trade , and industry of Japan and also of Asia .
The city is the center of the largest metropolitan area in the world .
It faces Tokyo Bay .
It became the capital city of Japan in the middle of 19th century , when its name changed from Edo to Tokyo .
Before then , Kyoto was the capital of Japan .
The Emperor of Japan , or Tenno , lived in Kyoto .
Edo was the place where the Tokugawa Shoguns lived .
The city grew up under the control of the shoguns .
Before then it was a small town on the sea .
Edo means the mouth of a river in Japanese .
Tokyo was destroyed by fires started by the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923 .
It was also badly damaged by bombs during World War II .
After Japan lost the war , the city was rebuilt .
== History ==
=== === Tokyo began as a small fishing village named Edo .
Edo was in the old Musashi Edo clan built walls to protect the town in the late 12th century .
In 1457 , Ōta Dōkan built Edo Castle .
In 1590 , Tokugawa Ieyasu made Edo his base .
He became shogun in 1603 , and the town became the center of his military government .
This marked the beginning of the Edo period .
During this time , Edo grew into one of the largest cities in the world .
More than one million people lived there by the 18th was not the capital of Japan .
The emperor lived in the capital , Kyoto .
However , since the shogun was more powerful than the emperor throughout Japanese history , Edo had more power .
After about 263 years , the Meiji Restoration removed the shogun from power .
In 1869 , the Emperor Meiji moved to Edo .
The old Edo Castle became the Kokyo , the Imperial Palace .
=== === The Tokyo Prefecture and the city of Tokyo were established .
This was the capital city until 1943 .
=== === In 1943 , Tokyo City and the associated municipalities of what was formerly Tokyo Prefecture ( 東京府 , ) combined into one .
Central Tokyo is built around major railway stations .
Suburban railways were built relatively cheaply at street level .
There are some expressways .
Tokyo suffered two major catastrophes in the 20th century .
The 1923 Great Kantō earthquake left dead or missing .
World War II was the other disaster for the city .
The Bombing of Tokyobfrom 1944 through 1945 killed between and people and destroyed half the city .
This was almost as much damage as the atomic bombs of Hiroshima and Nagasaki was completely rebuilt after the war .
The 1964 Summer Olympics were a major world event .
New developments such as Sunshine 60 started in the 1970s .
== Climate ==
Tokyo has a climate with rainy summers and dry winters .
== Population ==
As of October 2007 about million were living in Tokyo 23 special wards .
The number of people in Tokyo increases to over 15 million during the day .
About million workers and students enter the city everyday .
The three central wards of Chiyoda , Chūō , and Minato increase the most .
As of 2005 , the regular population in those three areas was only at night , but there are million in those areas during the has many international residents .
As of 2005 , the most common groups in Tokyo are Chinese , Koreans , and Filipinos .
Americans , British , Brazilian and French are less common .
== Special wards ==
The 23 special wards of Tokyo are the same area that had been called Tokyo City .
On July 1 , 1943 , Tokyo City was merged with Tokyo Prefecture ( 東京府 , ) to become a special government area .
This made the wards different from other wards in Japan .
Other city wards are part of a larger city government , but these are not .
Each ward is a municipality with its own mayor and assembly like the other cities of Japan .
The special wards often use the word city in their official English name , .
Chiyoda City .
The wards have a unique administrative relationship with the prefectural government .
The Tokyo Metropolitan Government manages some public works such as water , sewer , and .
To pay for these things , the prefecture collects the municipal taxes usually collected by a special wards of Tokyo are : Three wards of Tokyo make up the central part of the city .
They are Chiyoda , Chūō and Minato .
== Landmarks ==
Tokyo has many spots , but very few of them are old .
There are very few buildings in Tokyo that are more than 50 years old .
Popular places for visitors range from Tokyo Tower in the center of the city to Mount Takao out in the western countryside .
Tokyo Skytree is a new tower and is the tallest in Japan .
Traditional religious sights such as Meiji Shrine and attract many tourists .
The Imperial Palace can be seen in the middle of the city , but is not open to the public .
== Transportation ==
Tokyo is the cultural , business , and political center of the country .
It is also the center of many transport systems .
There are many air , rail , sea , and road links in and out of the city .
Local subway and bus systems serve every part of the city .
Two commercial airports serve Tokyo .
Haneda Airport is in the city limits next to Tokyo Bay .
This airport is mostly for domestic travel .
Most international flights to and from Tokyo go through Narita Airport in Chiba Prefecture .
Several Shinkansen railway lines begin at Tokyo Station , including the Tōkaidō Shinkansen going west and Tōhoku Shinkansen going northeast .
Tokyo Metro is the city major subway system .
Tokyo has a busy international and domestic port , but more traffic goes through the nearby port of Yokohama .
There are domestic ferries to the islands of Tokyo , but also to other parts of the country such as Hokkaido .
Many highways meet in Tokyo , including : the Chūō , , Tōhoku , and Tōmei Expressways .
All highway distances in Japan start from zero at a marker in Nihonbashi , Tokyo .
== Related pages ==
Tokyo Tokyo Metropolis Tokyo Verdy 2020 Summer Olympics === Universities in Tokyo ===
National Universities Hitotsubashi University Tokyo Medical and Dental University University of Tokyo Private Universities Keio University Nihon University Waseda University Waseda Jitsugyo ( Private school attached to Waseda Univ . )
== References ==
== Other websites ==
