Wikipedia ( pronunciation ) is a free Internet encyclopedia website in many languages .
People can freely use it , share it and change it , without having to pay .
It is also one of the biggest wiki organizations .
People can choose to donate to the Wikimedia Foundation to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects .
It is open content .
This means anyone can copy it , and make changes to it if they follow the rules for copying or editing .
Wikipedia is owned by an American organization , the Wikimedia Foundation , which is in San Francisco , California .
Wikipedia name is a portmanteau of two words , wiki and was started on January 10 , 2001 by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger as part of an earlier Internet encyclopedia named Nupedia .
On January 15 , 2001 , Wikipedia became a separate website of its own .
It is a wiki that runs using the software MediaWiki ( like all other Wikimedia projects ) .
Anyone who wishes to can change the pages in Wikipedia , or even make new ones .
Wikipedia has a standard page layout for all pages in the encyclopedia .
As of September 2011 , Wikipedia had about 18 million pages in about 300 languages , and more than billion words across all Wikipedias .
The regular English Wikipedia is the largest .
== History ==
Wikipedia began as a related project for Nupedia .
Nupedia was a free online encyclopedia project .
Nupedia articles were written and owned by Bomis , Inc which was a web portal company .
The main people of the company were Jimmy Wales , the guy in charge of Bomis , and Larry Sanger , the for Nupedia .
Nupedia was first licensed under the Nupedia Open Content License which was changed to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia was founded and made their first article when Richard Stallman requested Sanger and Jimmy Wales are the ones who started Wikipedia .
Wales is credited with defining the goals of the project .
Sanger created the strategy of using a wiki to reach Wales goal .
On January 10 , 2001 , Larry Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a feeder project for Nupedia .
Wikipedia was launched on January 15 , 2001 .
It was launched as an edition at , and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list .
Wikipedia policy of neutral was codified in its initial months , and was similar to Nupedia earlier nonbiased policy .
Otherwise , there were not very many rules initially , and Wikipedia operated independently of gained early contributors from Nupedia , Slashdot , and also from search engines .
It grew to about articles , and 18 languages by the end of 2001 .
By late 2002 it had 26 languages , 46 by the end of 2003 , and 161 by the end of 2004 .
Nupedia and Wikipedia both existed until Nupedia servers were stopped in 2003 .
After this , its text was incorporated into Wikipedia .
The English Wikipedia passed the 2 mark on September 9 , 2007 , making it the largest encyclopedia ever assembled , even larger than the Yongle Encyclopedia ( 1407 ) , which had held the record for exactly 600 English Wikipedia reached 3 million articles in August 2009 .
The numbers of articles and contributors appeared to be growing less quickly around spring October 2014 , the Wikipedia Monument was unveiled to the public in Poland to honor all the contributors of the Wikipedia .
According to TechCrunch website , on 23 January 2020 , Wikipedia had surpassed more than 6 million articles on the English Wikipedia .
=== 10th anniversary ===
On January 15 , 2011 , Wikipedia celebrated its 10th anniversary .
It used a special logo ( pictured ) to celebrate its 10 years since it opened on January 15 , 2001 .
The logo was used for the whole day on the sidebar of English Wikipedia .
== Using Wikipedia ==
Wikipedia is a free site where anybody can start or change a page .
It is a global site that is available in many languages .
While people can use any searching engine , the Wikipedia page will come out in the first results of many searches .
To use Wikipedia better , people should understand the basic function on the page .
The page is organized while they are looking up the page .
As Wikipedia users , they should have a good understanding of Wikipedia .
Did you know : Trivia from new articles .
In the news : News of the world .
On this day : Anniversaries .
Current events : Not available at present .
WIKIPEDIA The Free Encyclopedia WIKIPEDIA The 5th most popular site on the Internet was launched on January 15 , 2001 ( 1st edit by Jimmy Wales ) , is currently published in over 300 languages , has been freely available worldwide for 19 years , 10 months and 14 days Wikipedia ( as of February 10 , 2020 ) has over total articles ( in English ( stats ) ; in Simple English ) VITAL ARTICLES = ; BEST ARTICLES = over ; POPULAR ARTICLES ( Last Week ) = Top25 ; Top5000 and has ( for the Simple English version ) 18 administrators and active editors as of , November 29 , 2020 ( UTC ) .
Wikipedia = Is over 85 times the size of Encyclopedia Britannica .
( calc ) Wikipedia = Is encoded in synthetic DNA strands as of June 2019 .
Wikipedia = Is in glass on the Moon as of April 2019 .
Wikipedia = Is available as Books for as of July 2015 .
Wikipedia = Is honored with a Monument as of October 2014 .
Wikipedia = Is the name of an Asteroid as of January 2013 .
Wikipedia = Is one of the Jewels in the internet s crown .
Wikipedia = Nos Auxilium Facere Interrete Non Lactaverunt .
Wikipedia = Imagine a world in which every single human being can freely share in the sum of all knowledge .
That what we doing .
== Related pages ==
Simple English Wikipedia Epistemic community == Notes ==
== References ==
== Other websites ==
Wikipedia - multilingual portal ( contains links to all language editions of the project ) Wikipedia at the Open Directory Project CBC News : I , editor Wikipedia - Citizendium
