Apollo 11 was the first flight to send people to the moon .
It was done by NASA , the American space group .
It went up to space on July 16 , 1969 , carrying three astronauts : Neil Armstrong , Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins .
On July 20 , 1969 , Armstrong and Aldrin became the first humans to land on the moon , while Collins stayed in orbit around the Moon .
The flight was part of the Space Race .
It finished the plan set by John Kennedy in 1961 to land a man on the moon , and return him safely to the Earth , before the 1960s ended .
== The Flight ==
=== Going to and from space ===
Millions of people around the world viewed the flight of Apollo 11 on television .
When the rocket was sent to space it was a event .
Richard Nixon , who was then President , watched it from the White House as the rocket went up .
A Saturn V rocket took flight from the Kennedy Space Center in America .
About two hours after leaving Earth the passenger module departed the main rocket .
The passenger module had two main parts , the Apollo command and service module called Columbia and the Apollo Lunar Module called Eagle .
Columbia was the space ship that stayed in space , and Eagle was the space ship .
3 days later the team entered Lunar Orbit ( orbit around the moon ) .
A day later the Eagle went away from Columbia .
The Eagle landed safely on the moon with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin inside .
During the landing there were several problems with the computer .
To land safely Armstrong had to fly the Eagle himself .
They landed with only 25 seconds of fuel left .
=== Events on the moon ===
The first thing Buzz Aldrin did upon touch down was to pray .
He also read some words of Jesus .
He did not reveal his plan to do this because someone had just made a lawsuit to stop astronauts from doing religious things in space .
Armstrong became the first human to walk and speak on the moon surface .
The first words he said were : That one small step for [ a ] man , one giant leap for mankind .
For the next two and a half hours Aldrin and Armstrong took notes , pictures and made holes to get moon rock .
The landings were watched by over six million people on Earth using the very big radio telescope in Australia .
They did many experiments , for example the collecting of moon rocks and dust .
An American flag was set up and photographed on the moon .
Before doing that , President Richard Nixon did a telephone call to them : Nixon : Hello , Neil and Buzz .
I talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room at the White House .
And this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made .
I just ca tell you how proud we all are of what you done .
For every American , this has to be the proudest day of our lives .
And for people all over the world , I am sure they too join with Americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is .
Because of what you have done , the heavens have become a part of man world .
And as you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquillity , it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquillity to Earth .
For one priceless moment in the whole history of man , all the people on this Earth are truly one : one in their pride in what you have done , and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth .
Armstrong : Thank you , President .
It a great honor and privilege for us to be here , representing not only the United States , but men of peace of all nations , and with interest and curiosity , and men with a vision for the future .
It an honor for us to be able to participate here today .
=== Leaving the moon and returning to Earth ===
After finishing their work , Armstrong and Aldrin returned to the Eagle and slept for seven hours before starting to leave .
While preparing to leave , Aldrin broke the circuit breaker in the engine starter .
Armstrong used a pen to bridge the circuit and stop them from being stuck on the moon .
Aldrin and Armstrong left many things on the moon : an American flag , a few experiments , a golden feather , a logo of Apollo 1 and some bronze coins honoring Yuri Gagarin and Vladimir Komarov .
He also left a sign on the moon , with a message from the human race .
The sign reads : Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon , July 1969 We came in peace for all mankind .
On July 24 the three astronauts returned to Earth and were immediately placed into quarantine ( kept away from other people ) , in case they brought back some disease from the moon .
They stayed in quarantine for three weeks .
When they got out the men were heroes around the world .
They had dinner with President Nixon , a parade in New York City and another one in Chicago .
The three were also on many television shows .
== Photos ==
== Related pages ==
Apollo Program Moon landing conspiracy theories 
== References ==
== Other websites ==
The Apollo Program Apollo 11 Image Gallery The History Place : Apollo 11 Apollo 11 Mission
