Slavery in the United States was the legal institution of human slavery in the United States .
Slaves were mostly Africans and African Americans .
Slavery existed in the United States of America in the 18th and 19th centuries .
Slavery existed in British America from early colonial days .
Slavery was legal in all Thirteen Colonies at the time of the Declaration of Independence in 1776 .
It lasted in about half the states until 1865 .
This was when it was banned in the entire country by the Thirteenth Amendment .
By the time of the American Revolution , slaves had been institutionalized as a racial caste .
The caste associated with African ancestry .
When the United States Constitution was ratified in 1789 , a small number of free people of color were able to vote .
This was because they were men who owned property .
During and shortly after the Revolutionary War , abolitionist laws were passed in most Northern states , and there was a movement created to end slavery .
Slave states tried to extend slavery into new Western territories .
They wanted to do this to keep their share of political power in the country .
Southern leaders also wanted to annex Cuba as a slave territory .
The United States became split over the issue of slavery .
It was split into slave and free states .
The line divided the country .
The line divided ( free ) Pennsylvania from ( slave ) Maryland .
While Jefferson was president , Congress prohibited the importation of slaves , effective 1808 .
Although smuggling ( illegal importing ) through Spanish Florida was common .
Slave trading within the United States , however , continued at a fast pace .
This was because there was a need for labor due to the creation of cotton plantations in the Deep South .
New communities of culture were created in the Deep South .
There were 4 million slaves in the Deep South before they were set free .
== Colonial America ==
The first Africans came to the New World with Christopher Columbus in 1492 .
An African crew member named Juan Las Canaries was on Columbus ship .
Shortly after , the first enslavement happened in what would later be the United States .
In 1508 , Ponce de Leon created the first settlement near San Juan .
He started enslaving the indigenous Tainos .
In 1513 , to supplement the decreasing number of Tainos people , the first African slaves were imported to Puerto first African slaves in the continental United States came via Santo Domingo to the San Miguel de Gualdape colony ( most likely located in the Winyah Bay area of South Carolina ) .
It was created by Spanish explorer Lucas Vázquez de Ayllón in colony was almost immediately disrupted by a fight over leadership .
During the fight , the slaves revolted , and they ran away from the colony to hide among local Native Americans .
De Ayllón and many of the colonists died shortly after from a sickness .
The colony was abandoned .
The settlers and the slaves who did run away went back to Haiti , from where they August 28 , 1565 , Augustine , Florida was created by the Spanish conquistador Don Pedro Menendez de Aviles .
He brought three African slaves with him .
During the 16th and 17th centuries , Augustine was the where a lot of the slave trade in Spanish colonial Florida happened .
It was the first permanent settlement in the continental United States to have African years later , in the early years of the Chesapeake Bay settlements , colonial officials found it difficult to convince people to come and work for them .
This was because the weather and environment of the settlements was very harsh .
There was a very high chance that people would die .
Most people came from Great Britain as indentured laborers .
They signed contracts that said they would pay with work for their transportation , their upkeep , and their training , usually on a farm .
The colonies had agricultural economies .
These people were often young people who wanted to become permanent residents .
In some cases , convicted criminals were sent to the colonies as indentured laborers , rather than being sent to prison .
These people were not slaves , but they were required to work for four to seven years in Virginia to pay for the cost of their transportation and maintenance .
Many Germans , , and Irish came to the colonies in the 18th century , settling in the backcountry of Pennsylvania and further first 19 or so Africans to reach the English colonies arrived in Jamestown , Virginia , in 1619 .
They were brought by English privateers who had seized them from a captured Portuguese slave ship .
Slaves were usually baptized in Africa before sending them .
As English custom then considered baptized Christians exempt from slavery , colonists treated these Africans as indentured servants .
The African indentured servants joined about English indentured servants already in the colony .
The Africans were freed after a period of time .
They were also given the use of land and supplies by their former masters .
There were no laws about slavery in Virginia early history .
However , in 1640 , a Virginia court sentenced John Punch , an African , to slavery .
This was because he tried to run away from his service .
He ran away with two white people .
The two white people were sentenced only to one more year of their indenture , and three years service to the colony .
This is the first legal sanctioning of slavery in the English colonies .
It was one of the first legal distinctions made between Europeans and 1641 , Massachusetts became the first colony to allow slavery through law .
Massachusetts passed the Body of Liberties .
It banned slavery in many cases , but it allowed slaves to be held if they were prisoners of war , if they sold themselves into slavery or were bought somewhere else , or if they were sentenced to slavery as punishment by the government .
The Body of Liberties used the word strangers to refer to people bought and sold as slaves ; they were generally not English subjects .
Colonists believed this term referred to Native Americans and most of the British colonial period , slavery existed in all the colonies .
Slaves in the North usually worked as house servants , artisans , laborers , and craftsmen .
Most were in cities .
Many men worked on the docks and in shipping .
In 1703 , more than 42 percent of New York City households had slaves .
New York City had the proportion of slaves of any city in the colonies after Charleston , South Carolina .
Slaves were also used as agricultural workers in farming communities .
This included areas of upstate New York and Long Island , Connecticut , and New Jersey .
By 1770 there were Blacks in a population of million .
They were not spread out evenly .
There were in New England where they were of the population ; in the colonies where they were 6 of the population ( were in New York or 11 ) ; and in the five southern colonies where they were 31 of the South developed an agricultural economy .
It relied on commodity crops .
Its planters quickly got more slaves .
This was because its commodity crops were .
== Revolutionary Era ==
While there were some African slaves that were kept and sold in England , slavery in Great Britain had not been allowed by statute there .
In 1772 , it was made unenforceable at common law in England and Wales by a legal decision .
The big British role in the international slave trade continued until 1807 .
Slavery continued in most of Britain colonies .
Many rich slave owners lived in England and had a lot of power .
In early 1775 Lord Dunmore , royal governor of Virginia , wrote to Lord Dartmouth .
He wrote he was going to free slaves owned by Patriots in case they rebelled .
On November 7 , 1775 , Lord Dunmore issued Lord Dunmore Proclamation which declared martial law .
He promised freedom for any slaves of American patriots who would leave their masters and join the royal forces .
Slaves owned by Loyalist masters , however , were not going to be freed by Dunmore Proclamation .
About 1500 slaves owned by Patriots ran away and joined Dunmore forces .
Most died of disease before they could do any fighting .
Three hundred of these freed slaves made it to freedom in slaves used the war to run away from their plantations .
They would run into cities or woods .
In South Carolina , nearly slaves ( 30 of the total enslaved population ) ran away , migrated , or died during the war .
In the South , many slaves died , with many due to escapes .
Slaves also escaped throughout New England and the , joining the British who had occupied New York .
Slaves and free blacks also fought with the rebels during the Revolutionary War .
Washington allowed slaves to be freed who fought with the American Continental Army .
Rhode Island started enlisting slaves in 1778 .
Rhode Island promised money to owners whose slaves enlisted and lived to gain freedom .
During the course of the war , about one fifth of the northern army was black .
In 1781 , Baron Closen , a German officer in the French Royal Regiment at the Battle of Yorktown , estimated the American army to be about black .
These men included both former slaves and free blacks .
In the 18th century , Britain became the world biggest slave trader .
Starting in 1777 , the Patriots made importing slaves illegal state by state .
They all acted to end the international trade .
However , it was later reopened in South Carolina and Georgia .
In 1807 Congress acted on President Jefferson advice and made importing slaves from other countries a federal crime , as the Constitution permitted , starting January 1 , 1808 .
== 1790 to 1860 ==
=== Fancy ladies ===
In the United States in the early nineteenth century , owners of female slaves could freely and legally use them as sexual objects .
This is similar to the free use of female slaves on slave ships by the crews .
Fancy was a code word that meant the girl or young woman was able to be used for or trained for sexual use .
Sometimes , children were also abused like this .
The sale of a nearly a fancy is , females who were able to become pregnant were supposed to be kept pregnant , so they could make more slaves to sell .
The differences in skin color found in the United States make it obvious how often black women were impregnated by whites .
For example , in the 1850 Census , of free negros in Florida were described as mulattos , of mixed race .
Nevertheless , it is only very recently , with DNA studies , that any sort of reliable number can be provided , and the research has only begun .
girls , who contrasted with the darker field workers , were preferred .
== Blacks who owned slaves ==
Some slave owners were black .
An African former indentured servant who settled in Virginia in 1621 , Anthony Johnson , became one of the earliest documented slave owners in the American colonies .
This was documented when he won a civil lawsuit to own a man named John Casor .
In 1830 , there were black slave owners in the South .
They owned a total of slaves .
80 of the black slave owners lived in Louisiana , South Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland .
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
=== National and comparative studies ===
=== State and local studies ===
Video Jenkins , Gary ( director ) .
Negroes To Hire ( Lifedocumentaries , 2010 ) ; 52 minutes DVD ; on slavery in Missouri Gannon , James ( October 25 , 2018 ) .
A Moral Debt : The Legacy of Slavery in the USA .
Gannon is a descendant of Robert Lee === Historiography ===
=== Primary sources ===
== More reading ==
=== Scholarly books ===
Baptist , Edward ( 2014 ) .
The Half Has Never Been Told : Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism .
Basic Books .
ISBN .
Beckert , Sven ( 2014 ) .
[ Slavery in the United States at Google Books Empire of Cotton : A Global History ] .
Knopf Doubleday .
ISBN .
Beckert , Sven ; Rockman , Seth , eds .
( 2016 ) .
Slavery capitalism : a new history of American economic development .
University of Pennsylvania Press .
ISBN 9780812248418 .
Forret , Jeff ( 2015 ) .
New directions in slavery studies : commodification , community , and comparison .
Louisiana State University Press .
ISBN 9780807161159 .
Johnson , Walter ( 2013 ) .
River of Dark Dreams : Slavery and Empire in the Cotton Kingdom .
Harvard University Press .
ISBN 9780674045552 .
Schermerhorn , Calvin ( 2015 ) .
The business of slavery and the rise of American capitalism , .
Yale University Press .
ISBN 9780300192001 .
=== Scholarly pages ===
Turner , Edward Raymond ( 1912 ) .
The First Abolition Society in the United States .
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography .
pp .
Singleton , Theresa A .
( 1995 ) .
The Archaeology of Slavery in North America .
Annual Review of Anthropology .
pp .
McCarthy , Thomas ( December 2004 ) .
Coming to Terms with Our Past , Part II : On the Morality and Politics of Reparations for Slavery .
Political Theory .
32 ( 6 ) .
pp .
Lindsey , Treva ; Johnson , Jessica Marie ( Fall 2014 ) .
Searching for Climax : Black Erotic Lives in Slavery and Freedom .
Meridians : feminism , race , transnationalism .
12 ( 2 ) : .
Retrieved March 25 , 2018 .
=== Oral histories and autobiographies of ===
Goings , Henry ( 2012 ) .
Schermerhorn , Calvin ; Plunkett , Michael ; Gaynor , Edward ( eds . ) .
Rambles of a Runaway from Southern Slavery .
University of Virginia Press .
ISBN .
Hurmence , Belinda , ed .
( 1989 ) .
Before Freedom When I Just Can Remember : Oral Histories of Former South Carolina Slaves .
Blair .
ISBN .
Hurmence , Belinda , ed .
( 1990 ) .
Before Freedom : Oral Histories of Former North South Carolina Slaves .
Mentor Books .
ISBN .
Hurmence , Belinda , ed .
( 1990 ) .
My Folks Do Want Me to Talk about Slavery : Oral Histories of Former North Carolina Slaves .
Hurmence , Belinda , ed .
( 1997 ) .
Slavery Time When I Was Chillun .
Putnam Sons .
ISBN .
Hurmence , Belinda , ed .
( 1994 ) .
We Lived in a Little Cabin in the Yard : Personal Accounts of Slavery in Virginia .
Blair .
ISBN .
Jacobs , Harriet Ann ( 1861 ) .
Child , Maria ( ed . ) .
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl , Written by Herself ( PDF ) .
Thayer Eldridge .
Johnson , Clifton ( 1993 ) .
God Struck Me Dead , Voices of .
Pilgrim Press .
ISBN .
=== Literary and cultural criticism ===
Ryan , Tim A .
Calls and Responses : The American Novel of Slavery since Gone with the Wind .
Baton Rouge : Louisiana State University Press , 2008 .
Van Deburg , William .
Slavery and Race in American Popular Culture .
Madison : University of Wisconsin Press , 1984 .
=== Documentary movies ===
Kovgan , Ray , Browne , ( Director ) .
( 2008 ) .
Traces of the Trade [ Video file ] .
California Newsreel .
== Other websites ==
How Slaves Built American Capitalism , CounterPunch , December 18 , 2015 Born in Slavery : Slave Narratives from the Federal Writers Project , , Library of Congress Voices from the Days of Slavery , audio interviews of former slaves , , Library of Congress Report of the Brown University Steering Committee on Slavery and Justice Slavery and the Making of America , WNET ( series ) Slavery in the United States , Economic History Encyclopedia , March 26 , 2008 North American Slave Narratives , Documenting the American South , Louis Round Wilson Library Slavery and Civil War digital collection , scanned original documents , Grand Valley State University How Slavery Really Ended in America , New York Times Magazine , April 1 , 2011 The Color Line , lesson plan for high school , Zinn Education Project The First Slaves , teaching guide for high school , Zinn Education Project Not Your Momma History , historical education about slavery and the 18th and African experience in America Harvesting Capitalism : Edward Baptist New Book Follows the Money on Slavery , The New York Times , October 3 , 2014 5 Things About Slavery You Probably Did Learn In Social Studies : A Short Guide To Half Has Never Been Told , HuffPost , October 25 , 2014 9 Facts About Slavery They Do Want You to Know Slavery maps in the .
Persuasive Cartography collection , Cornell University Library The Slave Trade Database has information on almost slaving voyages 1850 : New Orleans woman and child she held in slavery https : https :
