Eggplant ( US , Australia , New Zealand , anglophone Canada ) , aubergine ( UK , Ireland , Quebec , and most of mainland Western Europe ) or brinjal ( South Asia , South Africa ) is a plant species in the nightshade family Solanaceae .
Solanum melongena is grown worldwide for its edible fruit .
Most commonly purple , the spongy , absorbent fruit is used in several cuisines .
Typically used as a vegetable in cooking , it is a berry by botanical definition .
As a member of the genus Solanum , it is related to the tomato and potato .
Like the tomato , its skin and seeds can be eaten , but , like the potato , it is usually eaten cooked .
Eggplant is nutritionally low in macronutrient and micronutrient content , but the capability of the fruit to absorb oils and flavors into its flesh through cooking expands its use in the culinary arts .
It was originally domesticated from the wild nightshade species thorn or bitter apple , incanum , probably with two independent domestications : one in South Asia , and one in East Asia .
In 2018 , China and India combined accounted for 87 of the world production of eggplants .
== Description ==
The eggplant is a delicate , tropical perennial plant often cultivated as a tender or half-hardy annual in temperate climates .
The stem is often spiny .
The flowers are white to purple in color , with a five-lobed corolla and yellow stamens .
Some common cultivars have fruit that is egg-shaped , glossy , and purple with white flesh and a spongy , meaty texture .
Some other cultivars are white and longer in shape .
The cut surface of the flesh rapidly turns brown when the fruit is cut open ( oxidation ) .
Eggplant grows 40 to 150 cm ( 1 ft 4 in to 4 ft 11 in ) tall , with large , coarsely lobed leaves that are 10 to 20 cm ( 4 to 8 in ) long and 5 to 10 cm ( 2 to 4 in ) broad .
Semiwild types can grow much larger , to 225 cm ( 7 ft 5 in ) , with large leaves over 30 cm ( 12 in ) long and 15 cm ( 6 in ) broad .
On wild plants , the fruit is less than 3 cm ( 1 1⁄4 in ) in diameter ; in cultivated forms : 30 cm ( 12 in ) or more in length are possible for long , narrow types or the large fat purple ones common to the West .
Botanically classified as a berry , the fruit contains numerous small , soft , edible seeds that taste bitter because they contain or are covered in nicotinoid alkaloids , like the related tobacco .
== History ==
The plant species is believed to have originated in India , where it continues to grow wild , or in Africa .
It has been cultivated in southern and eastern Asia since prehistory .
The first known written record of the plant is found in Qimin Yaoshu , an ancient Chinese agricultural treatise completed in 544 C.E .
The numerous Arabic and North African names for it , along with the lack of the ancient Greek and Roman names , indicate it was grown throughout the Mediterranean area by the Arabs in the early Middle Ages , who introduced it to Spain in the 8th century .
A book on agriculture by Ibn Al-Awwam in 12th-century Arabic Spain described how to grow aubergines .
Records exist from later medieval Catalan and Spanish.The aubergine is unrecorded in England until the 16th century .
An English botany book in 1597 described the madde or raging Apple : This plant groweth in Egypt almost everywhere bringing foorth fruite of the bignes of a great Cucumber We have had the same in our London gardens , where it hath borne flowers , but the winter approching before the time of ripening , it perished : notwithstanding it came to beare fruite of the bignes of a goose egge one extraordinarie temperate yeere but never to the full ripenesse .
Because of the plant 's relationship with various other nightshades , the fruit was at one time believed to be extremely poisonous .
The flowers and leaves can be poisonous if consumed in large quantities due to the presence of solanine.The eggplant has a special place in folklore .
In 13th-century Italian traditional folklore , the eggplant can cause insanity .
In 19th-century Egypt , insanity was said to be more common and more violent when the eggplant is in season in the summer .
== Etymology and regional names ==
The plant and fruit have a profusion of English names .
=== Eggplant-type names === The name eggplant is usual in North American English and Australian English .
First recorded in 1763 , the word eggplant was originally applied to white cultivars , which look very much like hen 's eggs ( see image ) .
Similar names are widespread in other languages , such as the Icelandic term eggaldin or the Welsh planhigyn ŵy .
The white , egg-shaped varieties of the eggplant 's fruits are also known as garden eggs , a term first attested in 1811 .
The Oxford English Dictionary records that between 1797 and 1888 , the name vegetable egg was also used .
=== Aubergine-type names === Whereas eggplant was coined in English , most of the diverse other European names for the plant derive from the Arabic word bāḏinjān ( Arabic : ) .
Bāḏinjān is itself a loan-word in Arabic , whose earliest traceable origins lie in the Dravidian languages .
The Hobson-Jobson dictionary comments that 'probably there is no word of the kind which has undergone such extraordinary variety of modifications , whilst retaining the same meaning , as this'.In English usage , modern names deriving from Arabic bāḏinjān include : Aubergine , usual in British English , German , French and Dutch .
Brinjal or brinjaul , usual in South Asia and South African English .
Solanum melongena , the Linnaean name .
==== From Dravidian to Arabic ====
All the aubergine-type names have the same origin , in the Dravidian languages .
Modern descendants of this ancient Dravidian word include Malayalam vaṟutina and Tamil vaṟutuṇai .
The Dravidian word was borrowed into the Indic languages , giving ancient forms such as Sanskrit and Pali vātiṅ-gaṇa ( alongside Sanskrit vātigama ) and Prakrit vāiṃaṇa .
According to the entry brinjal in the Oxford English Dictionary , the Sanskrit word vātin-gāna denoted 'the class ( that removes ) the wind-disorder ( windy humour ) ' : that is , vātin-gāna came to be the name for eggplants because they were thought to cure flatulence .
The modern Hindustani words descending directly from the Sanskrit name are baingan and began .
The Indic word vātiṅ-gaṇa was then borrowed into Persian as bādingān .
Persian bādingān was borrowed in turn into Arabic as bāḏinjān ( or , with the definite article , al-bāḏinjān ) .
From Arabic , the word was borrowed into European languages .
==== From Arabic into Iberia and beyond ====
In al-Andalus , the Arabic word ( al- ) bāḏinjān was borrowed into the Romance languages in forms beginning with b- or , with the definite article included , alb- : Portuguese bringella , bringiela , earlier beringela .
Spanish berengena , alberengena.The Spanish word alberengena was then borrowed into French , giving aubergine ( along with French dialectal forms like albergine , albergaine , albergame , and belingèle ) .
The French name was then borrowed into British English , appearing there first in the late eighteenth century .
Through the colonial expansion of Portugal , the Portuguese form bringella was borrowed into a variety of other languages : Indian English and South African English brinjal , brinjaul ( first attested in the seventeenth century ) .
Malay berinjalā .
West Indian English brinjalle and ( through folk-etymology ) brown-jolly.Thus although Indian English brinjal ultimately originates in languages of the Indian Subcontinent , it actually came into Indian English via Portuguese .
==== From Arabic into Greek and beyond ====
The Arabic word bāḏinjān was borrowed into Greek by the eleventh century CE .
The Greek loans took a variety of forms , but crucially they began with m- , partly because Greek lacked the initial b- sound and partly through folk-etymological association with the Greek word μέλας ( melas ) , 'black ' .
Attested Greek forms include ματιζάνιον ( matizanion , eleventh-century ) , μελιντζάνα ( melintzana , fourteenth-century ) , and μελιντζάνιον ( melintzanion , seventeenth-century ) .
From Greek , the word was borrowed into Italian and medieval Latin , and onwards into French .
Early forms include : Melanzāna , recorded in Sicilian in the twelfth century .
Melongena , recorded in Latin in the thirteenth century .
Melongiana , recorded in Veronese in the fourteenth century .
Melanjan , recorded in Old French.From these forms came the botanical Latin melongēna .
This was used by Tournefort as a genus name in 1700 , then by Linnaeus as a species name in 1753 .
It remains in scientific use .
These forms also gave rise to the Caribbean English melongene .
The Italian melanzana , through folk-etymology , was adapted to mela insana ( 'mad apple ' ) : already by the thirteenth century , this name had given rise to a tradition that eggplants could cause insanity .
Translated into English as 'mad-apple ' , 'rage-apple ' , or 'raging apple ' , this name for eggplants is attested from 1578 and the form 'mad-apple ' may still be found in Southern American English .
=== Other English names ===
The plant is also known as guinea squash in Southern American English .
The term guinea in the name originally denoted the fact that the fruits were associated with West Africa.It has been known as 'Jew 's apple ' , apparently in relation to a belief that the fruit was first imported to the West Indies by Jewish people .
== Cultivars ==
Different cultivars of the plant produce fruit of different size , shape , and color , though typically purple .
The less common white varieties of eggplant are also known as Easter white eggplants , garden eggs , Casper or white eggplant .
The most widely cultivated varieties—cultivars—in Europe and North America today are elongated ovoid , 12–25 cm ( 4 1⁄2–10 in ) long and 6–9 cm ( 2 1⁄2–3 1⁄2 in ) broad with a dark purple skin .
A much wider range of shapes , sizes , and colors is grown in India and elsewhere in Asia .
Larger cultivars weighing up to a kilogram ( 2.2 pounds ) grow in the region between the Ganges and Yamuna Rivers , while smaller ones are found elsewhere .
Colors vary from white to yellow or green , as well as reddish-purple and dark purple .
Some cultivars have a color gradient—white at the stem , to bright pink , deep purple or even black .
Green or purple cultivars with white striping also exist .
Chinese cultivars are commonly shaped like a narrower , slightly pendulous cucumber .
Also , Asian cultivars of Japanese breeding are grown .
Oval or elongated oval-shaped and black-skinned cultivars include 'Harris Special Hibush ' , 'Burpee Hybrid ' , 'Bringal Bloom ' , 'Black Magic ' , 'Classic ' , 'Dusky ' , and 'Black Beauty ' .
Slim cultivars in purple-black skin include 'Little Fingers ' , 'Ichiban ' , 'Pingtung Long ' , and 'Tycoon' In green skin , 'Louisiana Long Green ' and 'Thai ( Long ) Green' In white skin , 'Dourga ' .
Traditional , white-skinned , egg-shaped cultivars include 'Casper ' and 'Easter Egg ' .
Bicolored cultivars with color gradient include 'Rosa Bianca ' , 'Violetta di Firenze ' , 'Bianca Sfumata di Rosa ' ( heirloom ) , and 'Prosperosa ' ( heirloom ) .
Bicolored cultivars with striping include 'Listada de Gandia ' and 'Udumalapet ' .
In some parts of India , miniature cultivars , most commonly called vengan , are popular .
=== Varieties ===
var .
esculentum common aubergine , including white varieties , with many cultivars var .
depressum dwarf aubergine var .
serpentium snake aubergine ==== Genetically engineered eggplant ====
Bt brinjal is a transgenic eggplant that contains a gene from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis .
This variety was designed to give the plant resistance to lepidopteran insects such as the brinjal fruit and shoot borer ( Leucinodes orbonalis ) and fruit borer ( Helicoverpa armigera ) 9 February 2010 , the Environment Ministry of India imposed a moratorium on the cultivation of Bt brinjal after protests against regulatory approval of cultivated Bt brinjal in 2009 , stating the moratorium would last for as long as it is needed to establish public trust and confidence .
This decision was deemed controversial , as it deviated from previous practices with other genetically modified crops in India .
Bt brinjal was approved for commercial cultivation in Bangladesh in 2013 .
== Cooking and preparing ==
Raw eggplant can have a bitter taste , with an astringent quality , but it becomes tender when cooked and develops a rich , complex flavor .
Rinsing , draining , and salting the sliced fruit before cooking may remove the bitterness .
The fruit is capable of absorbing cooking fats and sauces , which may enhance the flavor of eggplant dishes .
Eggplant is used in the cuisines of many countries .
Due to its texture and bulk , it is sometimes used as a meat substitute in vegan and vegetarian cuisines .
Eggplant flesh is smooth .
Its numerous seeds are small , soft and edible , along with the rest of the fruit , and do not have to be removed .
Its thin skin is also edible , and so it does not have to be peeled .
However , the green part at the top , the calyx , does have to be removed when preparing an eggplant for cooking .
Eggplant can be steamed , stir-fried , pan fried , deep fried , barbecued , roasted , stewed , curried , or pickled .
Many eggplant dishes are sauces made by mashing the cooked fruit .
It can be stuffed .
It is frequently , but not always , cooked with fat .
=== East Asia ===
Korean and Japanese eggplant varieties are typically thin-skinned.In Chinese cuisine , eggplants are known as qiézi ( 茄子 ) .
They are often deep fried and made into dishes such as yúxiāng-qiézi ( fish fragrance eggplant ) or di sān xiān ( three earthen treasures ) .
Elsewhere in China , such as in Yunnan cuisine ( in particular the cuisine of the Dai people ) they are barbecued or roasted , then split and either eaten directly with garlic , chilli , oil and coriander , or the flesh is removed and pounded to a mash ( typically with a wooden pestle and mortar ) before being eaten with rice or other dishes .
In Japanese cuisine , eggplants are known as nasu or nasubi and use the same characters as Chinese ( 茄子 ) .
An example of it use is in the dish hasamiyaki ( 挟み焼き ) in which slices of eggplant are grilled and filled with a meat stuffing .
Eggplants also feature in several Japanese expression and proverbs , such as Do n't feed autumn eggplant to your wife ( 秋茄子は嫁に食わすな , akinasu ha yomi ni kuwasuna ) and Always listen to your parents ( 親の意見と茄子の花は千に一つも無駄はない , oya no iken to nasubi no hana ha sen ni hitotsu mo muda ha nai , literally : not even one in a thousand of a parents ' opinion or an eggplant flower are in vain ) Korean cuisine , eggplants are known as gaji ( 가지 ) .
They are steamed , stir-fried , or pan-fried and eaten as banchan ( side dishes ) , such as namul , bokkeum , and jeon .
=== Southeast Asia ===
In the Philippines , eggplants are of the long and slender purple variety .
They are known as talong and is widely used in many stew and soup dishes , like pinakbet .
However the most popular eggplant dish is tortang talong , an omelette made from grilling an eggplant , dipping it into beaten eggs , and pan-frying the mixture .
The dish is characteristically served with the stalk attached .
The dish has several variants , including rellenong talong which is stuffed with meat and vegetables .
Eggplant can also be grilled , skinned and eaten as a salad called ensaladang talong .
Another popular dish is adobong talong , which is diced eggplant prepared with vinegar , soy sauce , and garlic as an adobo .
=== South Asia ===
Eggplant is widely used in its native India , for example in sambar ( a tamarind lentil stew ) , dalma ( a dal preparation with vegetables , native to Odisha ) , chutney , curry , and achaar ( a pickled dish ) .
Owing to its versatile nature and wide use in both everyday and festive Indian food , it is often described as the king of vegetables .
Roasted , skinned , mashed , mixed with onions , tomatoes , and spices , and then slow cooked gives the South Asian dish baingan bharta or gojju , similar to salată de vinete in Romania .
Another version of the dish , begun-pora ( eggplant charred or burnt ) , is very popular in Bangladesh and the east Indian states of Odisha and West Bengal where the pulp of the vegetable is mixed with raw chopped shallot , green chilies , salt , fresh coriander , and mustard oil .
Sometimes fried tomatoes and deep-fried potatoes are also added , creating a dish called begun bhorta .
In a dish from Maharashtra called bharli vangi , small brinjals are stuffed with ground coconut , peanuts , onions , tamarind , jaggery and masala spices , and then cooked in oil .
Maharashtra and the adjacent state of Karnataka also have an eggplant-based vegetarian pilaf called 'vangi bhat ' === Middle East and the Mediterranean ===
Eggplant is often stewed , as in the French ratatouille , or deep-fried as in the Italian parmigiana di melanzane , the Turkish karnıyarık , or Turkish , Greek , and Levantine musakka/moussaka , and Middle Eastern and South Asian dishes .
Eggplants can also be battered before deep-frying and served with a sauce made of tahini and tamarind .
In Iranian cuisine , it is blended with whey as kashk e bademjan , tomatoes as mirza ghassemi , or made into stew as khoresht-e-bademjan .
It can be sliced and deep-fried , then served with plain yogurt ( optionally topped with a tomato and garlic sauce ) , such as in the Turkish dish patlıcan kızartması ( meaning fried aubergines ) , or without yogurt , as in patlıcan şakşuka .
Perhaps the best-known Turkish eggplant dishes are imam bayıldı ( vegetarian ) and karnıyarık ( with minced meat ) .
It may also be roasted in its skin until charred , so the pulp can be removed and blended with other ingredients , such as lemon , tahini , and garlic , as in the Arab baba ghanoush and the similar Greek melitzanosalata .
A mix of roasted eggplant , roasted red peppers , chopped onions , tomatoes , mushrooms , carrots , celery , and spices is called zacuscă in Romania , and ajvar or pinjur in the Balkans .
A Spanish dish called escalivada in Catalonia calls for strips of roasted aubergine , sweet pepper , onion , and tomato .
In Andalusia , eggplant is mostly cooked thinly sliced , deep-fried in olive oil and served hot with honey ( berenjenas a la Cordobesa ) .
In the La Mancha region of central Spain , a small eggplant is pickled in vinegar , paprika , olive oil , and red peppers .
The result is berenjena of Almagro , Ciudad Real .
A Levantine specialty is makdous , another pickling of eggplants , stuffed with red peppers and walnuts in olive oil .
Eggplant can be hollowed out and stuffed with meat , rice , or other fillings , and then baked .
In Georgia , for example , it is fried and stuffed with walnut paste to make nigvziani badrijani .
== Cultivation and pests ==
In tropical and subtropical climates , eggplant can be sown in the garden .
Eggplant grown in temperate climates fares better when transplanted into the garden after all danger of frost has passed .
Eggplant prefers hot weather , and when grown in cold climates or in areas with low humidity , the plants languish or fail to set and produce mature fruit .
Seeds are typically started eight to 10 weeks prior to the anticipated frost-free date .
melongena is included on a list of low flammability plants , indicating that it is suitable for growing within a building protection zone.Spacing should be 45 to 60 cm ( 18 to 24 in ) between plants , depending on cultivar , and 60 to 90 cm ( 24 to 35 in ) between rows , depending on the type of cultivation equipment being used .
Mulching helps conserve moisture and prevent weeds and fungal diseases and the plants benefit from some shade during the hottest part of the day .
Hand pollination by shaking the flowers improves the set of the first blossoms .
Growers typically cut fruits from the vine just above the calyx owing to the somewhat woody stems .
Flowers are complete , containing both female and male structures , and may be self- or cross-pollinated.Many of the pests and diseases that afflict other solanaceous plants , such as tomato , capsicum , and potato , are also troublesome to eggplants .
For this reason , it should generally not be planted in areas previously occupied by its close relatives .
However , since eggplants can be particularly susceptible to pests such as whiteflies , they are sometimes grown with slightly less susceptible plants , such as chili pepper , as a sacrificial trap crop .
Four years should separate successive crops of eggplants to reduce pest pressure .
Common North American pests include the potato beetles , flea beetles , aphids , whiteflies , and spider mites .
Good sanitation and crop rotation practices are extremely important for controlling fungal disease , the most serious of which is Verticillium .
== Production ==
In 2018 , world production of eggplants was 54 million tonnes , led by China with 63 of the total and India with 24 ( table ) .
== Nutrition ==
Raw eggplant is 92 water , 6 carbohydrates , 1 protein , and has negligible fat ( table ) .
It provides low amounts of essential nutrients , with only manganese having a moderate percentage ( 11 ) of the Daily Value .
Minor changes in nutrient composition occur with season , environment of cultivation ( open field or greenhouse ) , and genotype .
== Host plant ==
The potato tuber moth ( Phthorimaea operculella ) is an oligophagous insect that prefers to feed on plants of the family Solanaceae such as eggplants .
Female operculella use the leaves to lay their eggs and the hatched larvae will eat away at the mesophyll of the leaf .
== Chemistry ==
The color of purple skin cultivars is due to the anthocyanin nasunin.The browning of eggplant flesh results from the oxidation of polyphenols , such as the most abundant phenolic compound in the fruit , chlorogenic acid .
== Allergies ==
Case reports of itchy skin or mouth , mild headache , and stomach upset after handling or eating eggplant have been reported anecdotally and published in medical journals ( see also oral allergy syndrome ) .
A 2008 study of a sample of 741 people in India , where eggplant is commonly consumed , found nearly 10 reported some allergic symptoms after consuming eggplant , with 1.4 showing symptoms within two hours .
Contact dermatitis from eggplant leaves and allergy to eggplant flower pollen have also been reported .
Individuals who are atopic ( genetically predisposed to developing certain allergic hypersensitivity reactions ) are more likely to have a reaction to eggplant , which may be because eggplant is high in histamines .
A few proteins and at least one secondary metabolite have been identified as potential allergens .
Cooking eggplant thoroughly seems to preclude reactions in some individuals , but at least one of the allergenic proteins survives the cooking process .
== Taxonomy ==
The eggplant is quite often featured in the older scientific literature under the junior synonyms ovigerum and trongum .
Several other names that are now invalid have been uniquely applied to it : Melongena ovata Mill .
Solanum album Noronha Solanum insanum Solanum longum Roxb .
Solanum melanocarpum Dunal Solanum melongenum .
Solanum oviferum Salisb .
Prachi Salisb.A number of subspecies and varieties have been named , mainly by Dikii , Dunal , and ( invalidly ) by Sweet .
Names for various eggplant types , such as lang|la|agreste , album , divaricatum , esculentum , giganteum , globosi , inerme , insanum , leucoum , luteum , multifidum , oblongo-cylindricum , ovigera , racemiflorum , racemosum , ruber , rumphii , sinuatorepandum , stenoleucum , subrepandum , tongdongense , variegatum , violaceum , and viride , are not considered to refer to anything more than cultivar groups at best .
However , Solanum incanum and cockroach berry ( capsicoides ) , other eggplant-like nightshades described by Linnaeus and Allioni , respectively , were occasionally considered eggplant varieties , but this is not correct.The eggplant has a long history of taxonomic confusion with the scarlet and Ethiopian eggplants ( Solanum aethiopicum ) , known as gilo and nakati , respectively , and described by Linnaeus as aethiopicum .
The eggplant was sometimes considered a variety violaceum of that species .
violaceum of de Candolle applies to Linnaeus ' aethiopicum .
An actual violaceum , an unrelated plant described by Ortega , included Dunal 's amblymerum and was often confused with the same author 's brownii.Like the potato and lichtensteinii , but unlike the tomato , which then was generally put in a different genus , the eggplant was also described as esculentum , in this case once more in the course of Dunal 's work .
He also recognized the varieties aculeatum , inerme , and subinerme at that time .
Similarly , H.C.F .
Schuhmacher and Peter Thonning named the eggplant as edule , which is also a junior synonym of sticky nightshade ( sisymbriifolium ) .
Scopoli 's zeylanicum refers to the eggplant , and that of Blanco to lasiocarpum .
== See also ==
List of eggplant cultivars Eggplant production in China Eggplant salads and appetizers Imperial examination in Chinese mythology Lao eggplant List of eggplant dishes Solanum aethiopicum Vietnamese eggplant == References ==
