The raspberry is the edible fruit of a multitude of plant species in the genus Rubus of the rose family .
Most of which are in the subgenus Idaeobatus ; the name also applies to these plants themselves .
Raspberries are perennial with woody stems .
World production of raspberries in 2018 was 870,209 tonnes , led by Russia with 19 of the world total .
== Etymology ==
Raspberry derives its name from raspise , a sweet rose-colored wine ( mid-15th century ) , from the Anglo-Latin vinum raspeys , or from raspoie , meaning thicket , of Germanic origin .
The name may have been influenced by its appearance as having a rough surface related to Old English rasp or rough berry .
== Species ==
Examples of raspberry species in Rubus subgenus Idaeobatus include : Rubus crataegifolius ( Asian raspberry ) Rubus gunnianus ( Tasmanian alpine raspberry ) Rubus idaeus ( red raspberry or European red raspberry ) Rubus leucodermis ( whitebark raspberry or western raspberry , blue raspberry , black raspberry ) Rubus occidentalis ( black raspberry ) Rubus parvifolius ( Australian native raspberry ) Rubus phoenicolasius ( wine raspberry or wineberry ) Rubus rosifolius ( Mauritius raspberry ) Rubus strigosus ( American red raspberry ) ( syn .
idaeus var .
strigosus ) Rubus ellipticus ( yellow Himalayan raspberry ) Several species of Rubus , also called raspberries , are classified in other subgenera , including : Rubus deliciosus ( boulder raspberry , subgenus Anoplobatus ) Rubus odoratus ( flowering raspberry , subgenus Anoplobatus ) Rubus nivalis ( snow raspberry , subgenus Chamaebatus ) Rubus arcticus ( Arctic raspberry , subgenus Cyclactis ) Rubus sieboldii ( Molucca raspberry , subgenus Malachobatus ) == Cultivation ==
Various kinds of raspberries can be cultivated from hardiness zones 3 to 9 .
Raspberries are traditionally planted in the winter as dormant canes , although planting of tender , plug plants produced by tissue culture has become much more common .
A specialized production system called long cane production involves growing canes for a year in a northern climate such as Scotland or Oregon or Washington , where the chilling requirement for proper bud break is attained , or attained earlier than the ultimate place of planting .
These canes are then dug , roots and all , to be replanted in warmer climates such as Spain , where they quickly flower and produce a very early season crop .
Plants are typically planted 2-6 per m in fertile , well drained soil ; raspberries are usually planted in raised beds/ridges , if there is any question about root rot problems .
All cultivars of raspberries have perennial roots , but many do not have perennial shoots .
In fact , most raspberries have shoots that are biennial ( meaning shoots grow in the first growing season and fruits grow on those shoots during the second growing season ) .
The flowers can be a major nectar source for honeybees and other pollinators .
Raspberries are vigorous and can be locally invasive .
They propagate using basal shoots ( also known as suckers ) , extended underground shoots that develop roots and individual plants .
They can sucker new canes some distance from the main plant .
For this reason , raspberries spread well , and can take over gardens if left unchecked .
Raspberries are often propagated using cuttings , and will root readily in moist soil conditions .
The fruit is harvested when it comes off the receptacle easily and has turned a deep color ( red , black , purple , or golden yellow , depending on the species and cultivar ) .
This is when the fruits are ripest and sweetest .
High tunnel bramble production offers the opportunity to bridge gaps in availability during late fall and late spring .
Furthermore , high tunnels allow less hardy floricane-fruiting raspberries to overwinter in climates where they would n't otherwise survive .
In the tunnel plants are established at close spacing usually prior to tunnel construction .
=== Major cultivars ===
Raspberries are an important commercial fruit crop , widely grown in all temperate regions of the world .
Many of the most important modern commercial red raspberry cultivars derive from hybrids between idaeus and strigosus .
Some botanists consider the Eurasian and American red raspberries to belong to a single , circumboreal species , Rubus idaeus , with the European plants then classified as either idaeus subsp .
idaeus or idaeus var .
idaeus , and the native North American red raspberries classified as either idaeus subsp .
strigosus , or idaeus var .
strigosus .
Recent breeding has resulted in cultivars that are thornless and more strongly upright , not needing staking .
The black raspberry , Rubus occidentalis , is also cultivated , providing both fresh and frozen fruit , as well as jams , preserves , and other products , all with that species ' distinctive flavor .
Purple raspberries have been produced by horticultural hybridization of red and black raspberries , and have also been found in the wild in a few places ( for example , in Vermont ) where the American red and the black raspberries both grow naturally .
Commercial production of purple-fruited raspberries is rare .
Blue raspberry is a local name used in Prince Edward County , Ontario , Canada for the cultivar 'Columbian ' , a hybrid ( purple raspberry ) of strigosus and occidentalis .
Blue raspberry can also refer to the whitebark raspberry , leucodermis .
Fruits from such plants are called golden raspberries or yellow raspberries ; despite their similar appearance , they retain the distinctive flavor of their respective species ( red or black ) .
Most pale-fruited raspberries commercially sold in the eastern United States are derivatives of red raspberries .
Yellow-fruited variants of the black raspberry are sometimes grown in home gardens .
Red raspberries have also been crossed with various species in other subgenera of the genus Rubus , resulting in a number of hybrids , the first of which was the loganberry .
Later notable hybrids include the olallieberry , boysenberry , marionberry , and tayberry ; all are multi-generational hybrids .
Hybridization between the familiar cultivated red raspberries and a few Asiatic species of Rubus has also been achieved .
=== Selected cultivars ===
Numerous raspberry cultivars have been selected .
Two types of raspberry are available for commercial and domestic cultivation ; the summer-bearing type produces an abundance of fruit on second-year canes ( floricanes ) within a relatively short period in midsummer , and double or everbearing plants , which also bear some fruit on first-year canes ( primocanes ) in the late summer and fall , as well as the summer crop on second-year canes .
Those marked ( AGM ) have gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit .
Red , early summer fruiting Red , midsummer Red , late summer Red , primocane , fall , autumn fruiting Gold/Yellow , primocane , fall , autumn fruiting Purple Black === Diseases and pests ===
Raspberries are sometimes eaten by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species ( butterflies and moths ) .
Botrytis cinerea , or gray mold , is a common fungal infection of raspberries and other soft fruit under wet conditions .
It is seen as a gray mold growing on the raspberries , and particularly affects fruit which are bruised , as it provides an easy entrance point for the spores .
Raspberry plants should not be planted where potatoes , tomatoes , peppers , eggplants , or bulbs have previously been grown , without prior fumigation of the soil .
These crops are hosts for the disease Verticillium wilt , a fungus that can stay in the soil for many years and can infest the raspberry crop .
== Production ==
In 2018 , world production of raspberries was 870,209 tonnes , with Russia as the leading producer , supplying 19 of the world total ( table ) .
Other major producers were Mexico , Serbia , and Poland .
== Uses ==
=== Fruit ===
Raspberries are grown for the fresh fruit market and for commercial processing into individually quick frozen ( IQF ) fruit , purée , juice , or as dried fruit used in a variety of grocery products such as raspberry pie .
Traditionally , raspberries were a midsummer crop , but with new technology , cultivars , and transportation , they can now be obtained year-round .
Raspberries need ample sun and water for optimal development .
Raspberries thrive in well-drained soil with a pH between 6 and 7 with ample organic matter to assist in retaining water .
While moisture is essential , wet and heavy soils or excess irrigation can bring on Phytophthora root rot , which is one of the most serious pest problems facing the red raspberry .
As a cultivated plant in moist , temperate regions , it is easy to grow and has a tendency to spread unless pruned .
Escaped raspberries frequently appear as garden weeds , spread by seeds found in bird droppings .
An individual raspberry weighs 3–5 g ( 0.11–0.18 oz ) , and is made up of around 100 drupelets , each of which consists of a juicy pulp and a single central seed .
A raspberry bush can yield several hundred berries a year .
Unlike blackberries and dewberries , a raspberry has a hollow core once it is removed from the receptacle .
=== Nutrients ===
Raw raspberries are 86 water , 12 carbohydrates , and have about 1 each of protein and fat ( table ) .
In a 100 gram amount , raspberries supply 53 calories and 6.5 grams of dietary fiber .
The aggregate fruit structure contributes to raspberry 's nutritional value , as it increases the proportion of dietary fiber , which is among the highest known in whole foods , up to 6 fiber per total weight .
Raspberries are a rich source ( 20 or more of the Daily Value , DV ) of vitamin C ( 32 DV ) , manganese ( 32 DV ) and dietary fiber ( 26 DV ) ( table ) .
They also contain small amounts of additional vitamins , including Vitamin A , thiamine , riboflavin , vitamin B6 , calcium , and zinc .
Raspberries are a low-glycemic index food , with total sugar content of only 4 and no starch .
=== Phytochemicals ===
Raspberries contain phytochemicals , such as anthocyanin pigments , ellagic acid , ellagitannins , quercetin , gallic acid , cyanidins , pelargonidins , catechins , kaempferol and salicylic acid .
Yellow raspberries and others with pale-colored fruits are lower in anthocyanin content .
Both yellow and red raspberries contain carotenoids , mostly lutein esters , but these are masked by anthocyanins in red raspberries.Raspberry compounds are under preliminary research for their potential to affect human health .
=== Leaves ===
Raspberry leaves can be used fresh or dried in herbal teas , providing an astringent flavor .
In herbal and traditional medicine , raspberry leaves are used for some remedies , although there is no scientifically valid evidence to support their medicinal use .
== See also ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
Funt , R.C .
Hall , H.K .
( 2012 ) .
Raspberries ( Crop Production Science in Horticulture ) .
CABI .
ISBN 978-1-84593-791-1 == External links ==
Media related to Raspberry at Wikimedia Commons Raspberry .
Encyclopædia Britannica .
22 ( 11th ed . ) .
1911 .
Raspberries More ( University of Illinois Extension )
