Hong Kong ( ( listen ) ; Chinese : 香港 , Hong Kong Cantonese : [ ] ( listen ) , literally Fragrant Port ) , officially The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of The People 's Republic of China , is one of two Special Administrative Regions ( SARs ) of the People 's Republic of China ( the other is Macau ) .
It is one of the richest and most highly developed part of China .
Hong Kong grew quickly in the decades after World War II .
It is now a famous world class financial center .
Hong Kong was one of the last territories of the British Empire before China obtained it and it gained special status in 1997 .
The population of Hong Kong is more than seven million .
The economy has rapidly grown from a trading port to a very rich city .
Hong Kong also has the world 's largest number of skyscrapers .
Hong Kong is divided into 3 main parts : Hong Kong Island Kowloon New Territories ( including 235 outlying islands ) Hong Kong was a British colony from 1842 to 1997 because China lost the Second Opium War .
After the handover , Hong Kong became under Chinese control but with a lot of autonomy .
Hong Kong has its own constitution that is different from that of the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) .
== Climate ==
Hong Kong is in a tropical area , and has monsoon winds .
It is cool and wet in winter ( Jan-Mar ) , hot and rainy from spring through summer ( Apr-Sep ) , and warm , sunny and dry in the autumn ( Oct-Dec ) .
The rainy season is from May until September .
In summer and early autumn , there is a frequent threat of typhoons .
As Hong Kong is located nearly at the centre of the Eurasian Plate , there are sometimes tsunamis and earthquakes .
== Population and language ==
The population of Hong Kong reached 7 million ( 7,496,98 ) in 2020 .
Most of the people in Hong Kong are Chinese .
Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated countries in the world .
It has an overall density of 6,300 people per square kilometre .
Hong Kong has one of the world s lowest birth rates—1.11 per woman at an age of being capable to give birth as of 2012 .
This is far below the rate needed to replace each person , 2.1 .
People from Hong Kong mainly speak Cantonese .
Students are required to learn English at school .
Ever since Hong Kong became a part of China , the number of people who speak Mandarin has increased because Mandarin is the official language of the PRC .
== Public holidays ==
17 days of the year are public holidays in Hong Kong : 1 January - New Year 's Day , the beginning of the year the Chinese New Year - 15 days of celebrations , of which 3 are public holidays Qingming Festival , also known as Tomb Sweeping Day Easter ( 3 public holidays ) 1 May - Labour Day The Buddha 's birthday Dragon Boat Festival 1 July ( HKSAR Day ) the day after Mid-Autumn Festival 1 Oct - Chinese National Day Chongyang Festival - a day when people honor their ancestors , similar to Tomb Sweeping Day 25 December - Christmas 26 December - Boxing Day 31 December - New Year 's Eve , or the last day of the year == Currency ==
There are coins from 10 cents to 10 Hong Kong Dollars ; and bank-notes ( paper money bills ) from 10 to 1000 .
One American dollar is equal to about 7.75 in Hong Kong Dollars , at the official bank exchange rate .
== Public transport ==
Mass Transit Railway ( MTR ) which was established in 1979 , owns seven lines ( 10 lines after KCR merger ) , Kwun Tong Line ( running between Whampoa/Ho Man Tin and Tiu Keng Leng ) Tsuen Wan Line ( running between Tsuen Wan and Central ) Island Line ( running between Kennedy Town and Chai Wan ) South Island Line ( running between Admiralty and South Horizons ) Tseung Kwan O Line ( running between Po Lam/LOHAS Park and North Point ) Tung Chung Line ( running between Tung Chung/Tsing Yi and Hong Kong ) Airport Express ( running between AsiaWorld-Expo and Hong Kong ) Disneyland Resort Line ( running between Sunny Bay and Disneyland Resort ) East Rail Line ( running between Hung Hom and Lo Wu/Lok Ma Chau ) West Rail Line ( running between Hung Hom and Tuen Mun/Kam Sheung Road ) Tuen Ma Line Phase I ( Ma On Shan Line ) ( running between Wu Kai Sha and Kai Tak ) Bus : there are four major bus companies in Hong Kong , such as KMB which mainly services Kowloon , the rest are New Lantau Bus , who mainly services Lantau Island , Citybus , which mainly serves airport routes and New World First Bus , which mainly services Hong Kong Island .
Public Light Bus : in the 1960s , it was an illegal transportation , but later on , the government noticed that if there were only buses in Hong Kong , then some villages in N.T .
will not have a public transport .
Therefore , the Legislative Council made it legal and under government control .
Tram ( running between Kennedy Town , Happy Valley , and Shau Kei Wan ) Peak Tram ( running between Garden Road and Victoria Peak ) Taxi ( Red , Green , and Blue ) Ferry ( Lots of different companies , including the Star Ferry , First Ferry and Fortune Ferry companies ) Hong Kong International Airport is the main airport of the territory .
It is the busiest airport in the world in cargo traffic terms .
== Education ==
Hong Kong 's education system is mostly based off the English system .
Children are required to be in school from age 6 until completing secondary school ( high school ) at age 18 .
=== Universities ===
Hong Kong has 11 Universities : University of Hong Kong Chinese University of Hong Kong Hong Kong University of Science and TechnologyHong Kong Polytechnic University City University of Hong Kong Hong Kong Baptist University Education University of Hong KongOpen University of Hong Kong Lingnan University Hong Kong Shue Yan University Hang Seng University of Hong Kong == Housing in Hong Kong ==
According to the International Housing Affordability survey , Hong Kong has the most unaffordable housing market in the world.It has been ranked as most unaffordable since 2010 .
== Timeline of Hong Kong ==
Here is a brief history of Hong Kong : Around 4000 BC Sea levels rose above 100 metersAround 3500 BC Ceramic forms decorated with a wide range of patternsAround 2000 BC Bronze weapons , knives , arrowheads tools .
Metal worked locallyAround 500 BC Ancient Chinese writing developed221 BC People from Mainland China came to Hong Kong220 BC Coins from the Chinese Han period were used in Hong Kong1555 A Portuguese named Jorge Álvares was the first European to reach Hong Kong1799 China banned the drug trade in Hong Kong1800 Opium became a huge business 1839 Lin Zexu was appointed Special Commissioner The First Opium war began1841 Hong Kong was given to the British and became a dependent territory of United Kingdom Lord Palmerston wrote that Hong Kong was a barren island with only a few houses on it January 26 , 1841 The British flag was raised at Possession Point , on Hong Kong IslandAugust 1841 Sir Henry Pottinger became Hong Kong 's first governor The Treaty of Nanjing was signed , ending the First Opium War1860 China was defeated in the Second Opium War .
Boundary Street and Stonecutter 's Island were leased to Britain1888 The Peak Tram started operating on Hong Kong Island1898 Lantau Island and the New Territories were leased to the British for 99 years1900s Hong Kong became a refuge for exiles from China1920s-1930s Western dress began to come in fashion for the locals1933-1934 Father Daniel Finn began excavations on Lamma Island1941 Refugees fleeing the Chinese Communist Party came to Hong Kong December 8 , 1941 The Empire of Japan invaded Hong KongDecember 25 , 1941 The British authorities surrendered Hong Kong to the Japanese ArmyAugust 1945 Britain reclaimed its territory after Japan 's surrender1949 Double-decker buses were introduced to Hong Kong1950 Hong Kong became a free port1953 The Shek Kip Mei Estate was built , establishing the program of public housing1955 A Han period tomb was discovered near Lei Cheng Uk1983 The Hong Kong dollar was tied to the US dollar1984 China and Britain signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration1990 The Hong Kong Basic Law was confirmed1997 Asia 's financial crisis Archaeologists discovered 20 graves on the island of Ma Wa Tung Chee Wa elected as the first Chief Executive of Hong Kong .
Voting was conducted by 400 committees of an electoral college whose members are appointed by the Chinese Government.July 1 , 1997 Hong Kong became a Special Administrative Region of China for 50 years1998 Hong Kong International Airport opened , replacing Kai Tak Airport in KowloonJune 2002 Tung Chee Hwa was elected as Chief Executive for a second term.2003 Citizens wanted a more democratic and republican system The SARS epidemic beganMarch 10 , 2005 Tung Chee Hwa retired as chief executive because of health problems.June 16 , 2005 Donald Tsang Yam-kuen was elected unopposed as Chief Executive.March 2012 Leung Chun Ying was elected as Chief Executive.2014 People occupied the Central region to demand universal suffrage for the next chief executive election , to take place in 2017.2015 The government voted against the universal suffrage demanded by the people.2016 There were more protests in Mong Kok because the government voted against suffrage .
Police had to use pepper spray and Tear gas on the people to get them to leave.2019 Protestors in Hong Kong demonstrated against a new extradition law proposed by the government of mainland China.It was the largest protest in Hong Kong 's history .
According to Wikinews this law would allow Mainland China to extradite people living or visiting Hong Kong who may be fugitives .
The people did not want this because the reputation of China had been damaged by allegations of torture , forced confessions and arbitrary detentions before , and it would just bring Hong Kong closer under China 's control , even though Hong Kong have their own judicial system.2020 The Hong Kong National Security Law is created .
This law will give Beijing , more power to make the laws for Hong Kong .
Beijing , also put a security office in Hong Kong .
The law was created at 11 P.M. on 30 June 2020 , Hong Kong Time .
== Media ==
Hong Kong has a few media companies , notably Television Broadcasts Limited ( TVB ) , HK Television Entertainment ( HKTVE ) , and Fantastic Television .
Access to television is not affected by Chinese regulations , such as the Great Firewall , which filters and blocks certain programs .
== Places in Hong Kong ==
Hong Kong Disneyland Victoria Peak Victoria Park Ocean Park Man Mo Temple Repulse Bay Lo House Museum Hong Kong Park Yuen Po Street Bird Garden Hong Kong Museum of History Hong Kong Space Museum Hong Kong Museum of Science Technology Wong Tai Sin Temple Lantau Link Visitors ' Viewing Centre Fung Ying Sin Koon Kowloon Walled City Kowloon Mosque and Islamic Centre Kowloon Sham Tung Uk Po Lin Monastery and the Big Buddha on Lantau Island ( currently the largest bronze Buddha in world ) Cheung Chau ( Long Island ) Chek Lap Kok Hong Kong Island == Notes ==
== References ==
== Other websites ==
Hong Kong .
The World Factbook .
CIA .
23 August 2010 .
Retrieved 17 September 2010 .
