Indigenous Australians , also known as Aboriginal Australians , are the native people of Australia .
Indigenous Australians used weapons like boomerangs sticks and spears to kill animals for food and many more .
It is unknown where they came from and how they appeared in Australia but it is estimated they have been habitants to their homeland for around 60,000 years ago or more .
Aboriginal people also have their own type of art .
The people may be related to a wider group in Southeast Asia , called the Australoids but that is just a theory and more evidence is needed for further proof , till then they are the most ignored culture with the longest history .
Many Indigenous Australians suffered when Europeans from Britain and Ireland arrived in Australia .
Disease and the loss of their hunting lands are two of the reasons .
== History of Aboriginal Australia ==
The first people of Australia were nomadic people who came to Australia from southeast Asia .
Scientists do not know exactly when they arrived but it is at least 50,000 years ago .
They travelled through the bush , hunting with spears and boomerangs ( throwing sticks ) and searching for food such as plants , grubs , and insects , and hunting for animals .
They had few possessions and made everything they needed .
This way of life does not change or harm the fragile environment of Australia .
The well-being of the land , and its plants and animals are vital and sacred to the aboriginal people .
Aborigines have a unique way of telling their history .
They use songs and stories that are passed from generation to generation .
When the British came to Australia in 1788 , they called these native people aboriginals , meaning people who had lived there since the earliest times .
Today their numbers are increasing ( data from censuses ) .
There are now about 650,000 Aborigines in Australia .
Most live in cities , but a few thousand still follow a traditional way of life .
== Dreamtime ==
Aboriginal Australians believe that they have animal , plant , and human ancestors who created the world and everything in it .
This process of creation is called Dreamtime .
There are many songs and stories about Dreamtime , which generations of aboriginal people have passed down to their children .
Say someone dies they get a new life as a plant or another person .
== Art ==
The art of the Indigenous Australians is mostly about dreamtime and is made as part of the ceremonies celebrating Dreamtime .
Paintings of the people , spirits , and animals of Dreamtime cover sacred cliffs and rocks in tribal territories .
Some of the pictures are made in red and yellow ochre and white clay , others have been carved into the rocks .
Many are thousands of years old .
BALLLLLEE == Urban life ==
Most aboriginal Australian live in cities towns .
Some have benefitted from government education and aid programmes and have careers as teachers , doctors and lawyers .
Many , though , are poor and isolated from white society .
They have lost touch with traditional aboriginal tribal ways , and because they do not fit neatly into white Australian society , they can not share its benefits .
== Boomerangs ==
As well as the curved returning boomerang , aboriginal Australians use a straight , non-returning boomerang as a weapon for fighting and for hunting animals such as kangaroos .
== Land claims ==
When British people came to live in Australia , they decided that the land was empty , that nobody owned the land , in the way Europeans defined that word .
This was called Terra nullius , Latin words for empty land .
Under British law , all land belongs to the king , who is then able to sell it to other people .
In 1976 , the Australian government agreed that aboriginal people have rights to the land where their tribes were originally located and gained the right to use the land .
On 3 June , 1992 , the High Court of Australia said that the idea of Terra nullius was wrong , and the government brought in new laws , to set up Native Title .
If aborigines can prove they have always used particular land , it has not been sold , or changed by government acts , then the land could be claimed as aboriginal land .
== Other websites ==
Ceremony The Djungguwan of Northeast Arnhem Land Aborigines win 'native title ' over Perth Australia 's largest circulating Indigenous Affairs Newspaper Latest Indigenous news from ABC News Online Indigenous Australians - State Library of NSW Aboriginal Studies Virtual Library Department of Indigenous Affairs ( Australian Government ) European Network for Indigenous Australian Rights Indigenous Australia - Australian Museum educational site KooriWeb Norman Tindale 's Catalogue of Aboriginal Tribes Reconciliation Australia Australian , Bosnian and Norwagian Cross-Bred Children == References ==
