Penguins are seabirds in the family Spheniscidae .
They use their wings to travel underwater , but they can not travel in the air .
They eat fish and other seafood .
Penguins lay their eggs and raise their babies on land .
Penguins live only in the Southern Hemisphere of the world : Antarctica , New Zealand , Australia , South Africa and South America .
The furthest north they get is the Galapagos Islands , where the cold Humboldt Current flows past .
== Physical description ==
All penguins have a white belly and a dark , mostly black , back .
This is a type of camouflage to keep them safe when they swim , because it makes them blend in with their background .
The white and black colors make an effect called countershading .
When a predator looking from below sees the white belly and wings of a swimming penguin , they can not see the penguin well because the light is coming from above .
However , when seen from above , the penguin 's black back blends in with the dark water below , so they are hard to see .
The biggest penguins may stand nearly 4 feet tall ( 110 cm ) and can weigh almost 100 pounds ( 40 kg ) .
The smallest kinds are only about one foot ( 32 cm ) tall .
Penguins have a thick layer of blubber that helps them keep warm , and their feathers are very tightly packed to make another cover .
They also have a layer of woolly down feathers , under the outer veined feathers that are coated with a type of oil that makes them waterproof .
Penguins have webbed feet used for paddling in the water .
They can not walk well , so they waddle .
Penguins can not fly , but they can swim very well .
Their wings have become stiff and small swimming flippers .
They have good hearing and can see underwater .
== Life ==
Most penguins lay two eggs per year but emperor penguins lay only one .
After the penguins mate , the mother lays her egg or eggs and soon goes in the ocean to eat .
The father and mother take turns keeping the eggs warm , and the chicks warm after hatching .
The parent on baby duty has nothing to eat .
Parent penguins call to find each other amongst the thousands of birds when they return from the feeding grounds .
The time one parent is alone with the eggs or chicks and going hungry may be weeks or months depending on what kind of penguin they are .
If one parent does not return , the other must abandon the egg to go and eat .
=== Diet ===
Penguins eat krill , fish , squid , and other small animals from the ocean , which they catch .
They are at home in the ocean .
They come up on the land or ice to lay their eggs and raise the chicks .
They do n't eat there because they live in places where the land has no food for them .
In most species the birds all nest together in a huge group , called a rookery .
They usually make nests on the ground with rocks or mud .
Penguins can not taste fish .
This was discovered when a research team noticed they were missing some key genes for taste .
A closer look at the DNA of penguins showed that all species lack functioning genes for the receptors of sweet , umami , and bitter tastes .
It does n't matter to them , because they swallow the fish whole .
== Different kinds ==
There are 15-20 living species ( types ) of penguins .
The white-flippered penguin is today generally considered a subspecies of the little penguin .
It is still unclear if the royal penguin is a subspecies of the macaroni penguin .
Scientists are also uncertain whether rockhopper penguins are one , two , or three species .
=== List of penguins ===
Aptenodytes King penguin ( Aptenodytes patagonicus ) Emperor penguin ( Aptenodytes forsteri ) Pygoscoscelis Adélie penguin ( Pygoscelis adeliae ) Chinstrap penguin ( Pygoscelis Antarctica ) Gentoo penguin ( Pygoscelis papua ) Eudyptes ( crested penguins ) Rockhopper penguin ( Eudyptes chrysocome ) Fiordland penguin ( Eudyptes pachyrhynchus ) Snares penguin ( Eudyptes robustus ) Royal penguin ( Eudyptes schlegeli ) Erect-crested penguin ( Eudyptes sclateri ) Macaroni penguin ( Eudyptes chrysolophus ) Megadyptes Yellow-eyed penguin ( Megadyptes antipodes ) Eudyptula Little penguin ( Eudyptula minor ) White-flippered penguin ( Eudyptula minor albosignata ) African penguin ( Spheniscus demersus ) Magellanic penguin ( Spheniscus magellanicus ) Humboldt penguin ( Spheniscus humboldti ) Galápagos penguin ( Spheniscus mendiculus ) == Images ==
== Related pages ==
Tux ( Linux mascot ) == References ==
== Other websites ==
Penguin at Citizendium
