New Zealand ( known as Aotearoa in the M훮ori language ) is an island country in Oceania .
It is a sovereign state in the south-western part of the Pacific Ocean .
It is made up of two large islands ( the North Island and the South Island ) and many smaller islands .
These islands are located to the southeast of Australia .
New Zealand was one of the last places in the world that humans discovered , because it is a long way away from most of the world .
During its time without humans , New Zealand was a good place for an unusual range of plants and animals to develop .
The capital city of the country is Wellington , and the largest city is Auckland .
Both of these cities are on the North Island .
The largest city on the South Island is Christchurch .
The official languages are English , M훮ori and New Zealand sign language .
English has never been granted official language status in the NZ laws , but it is used as a default official language due to its wide usage .
In 2010 , a newspaper in NZ said that New Zealand was the 8th happiest country in the world .
== Name ==
In the M훮ori language , the country is called Aotearoa , which means Land of the Long White Cloud .
Ao means cloud , tea means white , and roa means long .
The name New Zealand comes from Zeeland ( which translates to Sealand ) in Dutch , after the islands were seen by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman .
Zeeland is a province of the Netherlands .
== Government and politics ==
New Zealand is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy .
The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II .
The Prime Minister is Jacinda Ardern , leader of the Labour Party .
New Zealand has made itself a Nuclear Free Zone : They do not use nuclear power and do not allow nuclear weapons or nuclear powered vessels in their territory .
Elections are held every 3 years .
== People ==
As of the 2018 census , 4,699,755 people lived in New Zealand .
Most of them have European ancestors .
The indigenous people of New Zealand , the M훮ori , have a population of 775,836 , or 16.5 .
The people of New Zealand often call themselves Kiwis .
This name is derived from the kiwi , a flightless native bird that is considered the country 's national bird .
The North Island is smaller than the South Island , but most people ( more than 3 million ) live there .
This might be because the North Island is usually warmer , and has more big cities .
About half of the people in New Zealand are religious .
As of the 2018 census , 48.2 had no religion .
The main religion in New Zealand is Christianity .
Just over 2 million New Zealanders are Christian .
The second most common religion is Hinduism , with 2.6 .
== Cities ==
Most New Zealanders live in urban areas , with the other 27 living in small towns or farming communities .
Wellington is the capital of New Zealand .
Auckland is the largest city , with around 1 million people .
Other cities in the North Island include Hamilton , Tauranga , Napier/Hastings , New Plymouth , Whanganui , and Palmerston North .
South Island cities include Christchurch , Dunedin , Nelson , Invercargill and Timaru .
== Geological origin ==
New Zealand sits at the boundary between the Australian and Pacific continental plates .
When these two plates bumped into each other ( 'collided ' ) , the Pacific plate moved under the Australian plate , north of the South Island .
As a result , there has been lots of volcanic activity .
South of the South Island , the Australian plate moves under the Pacific plate instead .
The plates slide past each other in the South Island , where they have pushed up the Southern Alps .
Because of these two colliding plates , New Zealand often has earthquakes .
One of the best known is the 2010-2011 group of earthquakes that hit the Christchurch area .
The diagram shows that the North Island is on the Australian plate , but most of the South Island is on the Pacific plate .
New Zealand is still geologically active , and will remain so as long as the islands are sitting above the plate boundary .
=== Ancient geology ===
The oldest rocks in New Zealand date from the Cambrian period , 512 million years ago .
New Zealand became part of the global supercontinent Pangaea .
When that split ( End-Triassic/early Jurassic ) , New Zealand became part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana .
Finally Gondwana broke up , leaving the continents rather as they are today .
== Natural history ==
New Zealand was isolated from the rest of the world for a long time .
It split from Australia 83 million years ago .
Because of this , there are many plants and animals that only live in New Zealand .
Before humans came to New Zealand , there were no mammals , except three species of bat and marine mammals such as seals , dolphins , and whales .
Instead , New Zealand has many different kinds of bird .
New Zealand has several species of flightless bird , including the kiwi and Kakapo .
For the lizards , especially important is the Tuatara , the only living member of a whole order of reptiles .
New Zealand used to have more rare species , but some , mostly birds , were hunted to extinction early in its history .
The giant Moa , Dinornis , is a famous example .
The group of birds which the moa belongs to had been in existence since the Cretaceous period .
Humans arrived in New Zealand about a thousand years ago , when many moa were living , especially on the South Island .
Archaeological sites with evidence of moa hunting are all over New Zealand .
The moa became extinct about five hundred years ago .
Extinctions closer to today have been caused by habitat change and introduced species like rats , dogs , cats , and possums , which kill the native birds and lizards , or eat their eggs .
== Other information ==
Sir Edmund Hillary , the first man to climb to the top of Mount Everest , was from New Zealand .
New Zealand has become more popular since New Zealander Peter Jackson made the The Lord of the Rings movies there .
Many farmers in New Zealand breed sheep .
There are many more sheep than people in New Zealand .
Many New Zealanders are interested in sports .
Their national sport is usually considered to be rugby ( in winter ) .
They have impressive athletes in rowing , cycling , shotput , discus , iron man , triathlon , yachting , climbing , surfing , cricket , netball , softball , wind surfing , gliding , and more .
New Zealanders enjoy outdoor pursuits .
The country has a clean , green image , but per-person emissions are 7th worst out of 41 industrialized nations as of 2017 .
Really bad air and water pollution is fairly rare , though occasional outbreaks in the past 20 years have caused problems for livestock and the surrounding waters .
Most major rivers ( 60 estimated as of 2017 ) are not safe to swim in due to farming pollution and run-off .
New Zealand , like many other small nations , has a strong local media .
New Zealand has a wide variety of musicians , television , and radio celebrities , and stand-up comedians .
Although most are simply world-famous in New Zealand , many others have successfully made it on the international scene .
Such people and groups include Russell Crowe ( actor ) , Kiri Te Kanawa ( singer ) , the Flight of the Conchords , Lorde , Crowded House ( bands/singers ) , Lee Tamahori , Taika Waititi , and Peter Jackson ( movie directors ) .
The NZ Army mostly does peacekeeping and natural disaster support .
New Zealand sent army engineers to Iraq to do rebuilding during the 2003 invasion of Iraq .
The middle of New Zealand 's North Island has an almost-desert .
State Highway 1 , the main north-south road , goes through that desert .
This section of the road in the desert - the Desert Road - can often be closed in winter .
It is called a desert because it has bare areas and unusual plants that normally grow on mountains .
== Related pages ==
Animals of New Zealand List of rivers of New Zealand New Zealand at the Olympics New Zealand national football team == References ==
== Notes ==
