A computer keyboard is an input device that allows a person to enter letters , numbers , and other symbols ( these are called characters in a keyboard ) into a computer .
It is one of the most used input devices for computers .
Using a keyboard to enter lots of data is called typing .
A keyboard contains many mechanical switches or push-buttons called keys .
When one of these are pushed , an electrical circuit is closed , and the keyboard sends a signal to the computer that tells it what letter , number or symbol it would like to be shown on the screen .
The computer 's CPU then shows the character on the screen , usually at the place where the cursor is .
Besides entering characters , computer keyboards also have special keys that change the symbol ( such as shift or caps lock ) or give the computer special commands ( such as the arrow keys , CTRL and ALT ) .
Different computer operating systems use different special keys , or use them differently .
Special commands can also be activated through a combination of keys ( such as Ctrl V on Windows to paste copied content ) .
A keyboard can be joined to a computer using a wire , but can also be wireless ( like those that use Bluetooth ) .
Most 21st century keyboards that use wires connect to a USB port on the computer , but older ones use a less versatile DIN connector port .
== Types ==
There are different types of keyboards .
They can be based on the way the keys work ; for example , laptops have keys that do not move a lot , because the keyboard has to be very thin in order to fit inside the laptop .
On the other hand , video game like keyboards with keys that move a lot , so that they feel if the key works and the game is working .
In between , an ergonomic keyboard is made to be easier for people to use , without hurting their hands or arms .
Most computer keyboards have the keys in six rows , but some laptops use only five or even four rows to save space .
There are also different ways the keys on a keyboard are laid out , usually to deal with different regions and languages of the world .
The most popular layout is called QWERTY , which is based on the first six letters on typewriter keyboards .
The QWERTY design was made so the most common letters would not make a mechanical typewriter jam , or stop working .
Now , even though most people do not use typewriters anymore , the design stayed because people were used to it .
Other layouts have been developed , for example the Dvorak keyboard , which puts the most common letters in the places that are easiest to reach .
Gaming keyboards are used for their fast reaction timing .
== Risks ==
Keystroke logging is capturing a record of each key that is pressed .
Keystroke logging can be used to measure employee activity .
Hackers can also use keystroke logging .
Scientists discovered that most keyboards give off electromagnetic radiation that can be used to tell which keys have been pressed .
Spies could determine what has been typed by remotely sensing such signals.Researchers are studying if keyboards can spread diseases .
Some keyboards were found to contain five times more germs than a toilet seat .
== Related pages ==
Computer mouse QWERTY Dvorak ( keyboard layout ) == References ==
