The Treaty of Versailles ( French : Traité de Versailles ) was a peace treaty between the nations of Japan , the United States , France , Germany and Britain after World War I .
The treaty was made in 1919 .
Germany , Austria and Hungary did not participate in writing it .
Germany had the choice between signing it or facing the occupation of Germany by Allied troops .
Germany had to reduce its armed forces from 6 million to 100,000 men and to get rid of its submarines , military aircraft and most of its artillery .
Its navy battleships were limited to only six small ones .
Germany also had to give back French territories it had occupied , as well as large territories of its own to Poland and other neighbours , and to give up all of its colonies .
Germany was to pay back the huge World War I reparations for the damage done to Allied countries , mostly France , during World War I by German troops .
The sum was to be very large but was not yet fixed : many gold marks had to be paid only as a first part of the German debt .
The treaty made a League of Nations , which was intended to make decisions and keep the peace after the treaty was signed .
The League solved some international disputes without war , but could not stop World War II .
This treaty can be seen as a one-sided peace , dictated to Germany .
The English economist John Maynard Keynes thought that it was a great mistake to force such harsh measures on the German people , but his advice was ignored .
Germany set up the Weimar Republic .
It was democratic but suffered an economic collapse , with the huge inflation of its currency , the mark .
Adolf Hitler became chancellor and overruled the treaty .
His actions eventually led to World War II .
== Terms ==
Germany had to give back French areas ( Alsace-Lorraine ) taken by Germany in the Franco-Prussian War , which was still an embarrassment for France .
The French made Germany take its troops out of the Rhineland ( the long stretch of land on Germany 's border with France where the Rhine River flows ) , an important part of land for Germany since it had many factories and businesses .
If Germany had its troops come back into the Rhineland , the French were allowed to invade Germany .
Germany also had to give parts to Poland , a country made out of Russian and Austrian parts and the Polish and Lithuanian people who lived in them .
Poland had been a big kingdom a few hundred years earlier , but Austria , Prussia and Russia had split it in the Partitions of Poland .
Belgium was allowed to have Moresnet and Eupen and Malmedy , which is the main reason that Belgium has a German-speaking community .
Versailles also split up many large empires on the losing side .
US President Woodrow Wilson thought that to be a very good idea because many people in Europe wanted to be free from the big empires .
but it also created problems such as having many small countries next to a much bigger Germany .
In the separate Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye the same year .
Austria-Hungary was split into many countries .
One was Austria , which was meant to be the homeland of the Austrians , who spoke German and mainly ruled Austria-Hungary .
Its capital was Vienna .
One of the problems of Versailles was that most Austrians , like Adolf Hitler , thought that Austria should become part of Germany , which later led to the German invasion of Austria .
Hungary was also created .
Like Poland , it was a country that was strong on its own centuries before .
Its capital was Budapest .
Another new country , Czechoslovakia was created to be the homeland of the Czechs and Slovaks .
The Czech part was made up of the country once called Bohemia and Moravia .
The country 's capital was Prague .
Many Germans lived near its borders in the the Sudetenland , and Hitler later insisted for it to belong to Germany , which many of its people wanted .
Bosnia , Slovenia , Croatia ( parts of Austria-Hungary ) , northern Macedonia ( part of Bulgaria ) , Serbia and Montenegro were made into one country , called Yugoslavia ( meaning Southern Slavic ) .
It was made to be a Southern Slavic homeland but had many religious , language and national differences .
New countries by the Baltic Sea ( Estonia , Finland , Latvia and Lithuania ) were also created in other treaties after World War I .
The Russian Revolution started during the war , and Tsar Nicholas II of Russia was killed and a communist state formed .
A civil war raged in Russia between the anticommunist White Russians and the communist Red Russians .
Russia had lost control of its western territory ( Estonia , Finland , Latvia , Lithuania and parts of Poland ) .
Later during the World War II , the Soviet Union would take over Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , and half of Poland .
Another treaty , the Treaty of Sèvres , gave parts the defeated Ottoman Empire to the various victors .
However , Greek and Turkish armies soon started another war .
== Long-term problems == The German Empire became the Weimar Republic .
A big problem for Germany was to pay back a giant amount of money ( million ) for the all of the damage done to the Allied countries , mostly France , during World War I .
That made Germany one of the poorest countries in Europe for almost 20 years and caused political fighting in Germany .
Two important parties , the Communist Party , which wanted a communist revolution like that of Russia , and the Nazis , who thought that Germany should become the most powerful country in Europe , fought for many years .
As Germany owed a huge amount of money to the Allies , it started to get loans by the US ( such as under the Dawes Plan ) .
When the Great Depression hit in 1932 , the US requested for all its money back .
Germany refused to pay and printed more and more money to pay debts .
That led to hyperinflation and the Reichsmark was worthless .
The German economy was shattered .
Many Germans hated the treaty , and some even wanted to fight another war to get rid of it .
Also , the League of Nations created after Versailles was usually not powerful enough to stop wars .
Japan took Manchuria and the League did not stop it .
Italy invaded Ethiopia , and although the Ethiopian Emperor begged the League to help him , it did not do so .
Germany , Japan and Italy left the League and became the Axis powers , and by invading many peaceful countries caused World War II .
The United States and , for a time , the Soviet Union , did not even join the League even though it was the idea of US President Woodrow Wilson in the first place .
The League was never taken seriously even though one reason that it was created to make sure that the treaty was followed .
The treaty failed to keep peace in the end and was a reason for Nazi Germany , led by Adolf Hitler , to win the support of many Germans to get rid of the chains of Versailles , leading to World War II .
Germany and the USSR signed the Treaty of Rapollo in 1922 , in which both governments agreed to ignore previous treaties ( Treaty of Versailles ) , cooperating 'in a spirit of mutual goodwill ' , and help one another with economic needs .
However , Germany broke this relationship by invading Poland ( USSR territory ) on 1 September 1939 .
This is the day World War 2 started .
== References ==
.
Langley , Andrew .
Living through World War II .
Chicago , IL : Heinemann Library , 2012 .
== Other websites ==
Treaty of Versailles Citizendium
