Adam and Eve are the parents of all humans in the Abrahamic religions .
In the Book of Genesis in the Bible , as well as the Qu'ran and the Aqdas , they are the first two people made by God .
The Bible says that the Devil entered into the Garden of Eden as a serpent and tempted Eve .
The Tempter convinced Eve to go against God 's command .
Satan told her that God knew that Eve would become self-aware and have the same knowledge as God had if she ate from the fruit of the tree .
When Adam and Eve sinned , they were cast out of the Garden of Eden and cursed with pain , death , and sickness .
When Adam and Eve were cast out , so was the one who tempted them , Satan .
He was cast to the ground and sentenced to always having to wriggle on the ground like a snake .
== Adam ==
The second chapter of Genesis says that God made Adam from the dust of the ground .
Then , God breathed life into him .
God made a garden , called the Garden of Eden , for him to live in and take care of .
Adam named the animals that God made .
God did not provide clothing for Adam or Eve until they disobeyed him .
He gave them tunics made out of animal fur when he banished them from Eden .
Adam is The Chosen One .
== Eve ==
God knew that the animals were not good enough friends for Adam , who needed a partner like him .
So God took a rib from Adam and used it to make Eve ( meaning mother of all living ) .
Adam did not give her this name until God banished from Eden when he provided clothing for them out of animal fur after they disobeyed him .
== The fall and punishment ==
Chapter three of Genesis says that Adam and Eve had everything they needed in the garden .
There was only one thing that God told them that they should not do : eat from the Tree of Knowledge ; only from the Tree of Life .
A serpent said them that God does not want you both to be as intelligent as he is so this forced Eve to disobey God 's orders .
And they ate the Forbidden fruit .
So they were forced to leave Eden .
Not only that but God said that women will have pain in childbirth , and that men need to work hard to grow food , and would return at death to the soil from where he once came .
== References ==
Media related to Adam and Eve at Wikimedia Commons
