A banana is the common name for a type of fruit and also the name for the herbaceous plants that grow it .
These plants belong to the genus Musa .
They are native to the tropical region of southeast Asia .
It is thought that bananas were grown for food for the first time in Papua New Guinea .
Today , they are cultivated in tropical regions around the world .
Most banana plants are grown for their fruits , which botanically are a type of berry .
Some are grown as ornamental plants , or for their fibres .
There are about 110 different species of banana .
In popular culture and commerce , banana usually refers to the soft and sweet kind , also known as dessert bananas .
Other kinds , or cultivars , of banana have a firmer , starchier fruit .
Those are usually called plantains .
Plantains are mostly used for cooking or fibre .
Other than being used as food , beer can be made by fermenting the juice of certain cultivars in Africa , known as beer bananas .
The ash of bananas can be used to make soap .
In Asia , bananas are often planted to provide shade to plants that like shade , for example coffee , cocoa , nutmeg or black pepper .
Because of this , banana plants can often be found in plantations of other crops .
== Banana plant ==
The banana plant is the largest herbaceous flowering plant .
Banana plants are often mistaken for trees .
Bananas have a false stem ( called pseudostem ) , which is made by the lower part of the leaves .
This pseudostem can grow to be two to eight meters tall .
Each pseudostem grows from a corm .
A pseudostem is able to produce a single bunch of bananas .
After fruiting , the pseudostem dies and is replaced .
When most bananas are ripe , they turn yellow or , sometimes , red .
Unripe bananas are green .
Banana leaves grow in a spiral and may grow 2.7 metres ( 8.9 feet ) long and 60 cm ( 2.0 ft ) wide .
They are easily torn by the wind , which results in a familiar , frayed look .
== Fruit ==
The banana fruits grow from a banana blossom in hanging clusters , also called a bunch or banana stem .
The fruits grow in rows called tiers or hands .
There can be as many as twenty fruits to a hand , and as many as twenty tiers in a bunch .
A bunch usually weighs between 30 and 50 kilograms ( 65 to 110 pounds ) .
A single fruit weighs about 125 grams ( 4.4 ounces ) on average ; about three quarters of this is water .
Each banana ( or finger ) has a protective outer layer ( called peel or skin ) .
There is a fleshy part inside that readily spilts into three segments .
It is the only known tri-segmented fruit in the world .
Both the skin and inner part can be eaten .
Western cultures generally eat the inside raw and throw away the skin .
Some Asian cultures eat both the skin and the inside cooked .
Each fruit has many strings that run between the skin and the inner part .
Bananas have a lot of vitamin B6 , vitamin C , and potassium .
== Growing and trading bananas ==
Bananas are grown in at least 107 countries .
The banana species growing in the wild have fruits with many hard , large seeds , but almost all bananas grown to be eaten have seedless fruits .
Bananas are classified either as dessert bananas or as green cooking bananas .
Almost all export bananas are of the dessert types .
Only about ten to fifteen percent of all production is for export .
Dessert bananas change their color and usually turn yellow , when they are ripe ; plantains and bananas generally used for cooking stay green .
Certain bananas have other colors when ripe .
The countries that produce the most bananas include India , Brazil , China , Ecuador and the Philippines .
The top five countries that exported bananas were Ecuador , Costa Rica , the Philippines , Colombia and Guatemala .
The United States , the European Union and Japan buy the most bananas .
Bananas are among the most valuable agricultural export products ; They provided about sixty percent of export earnings of Saint Lucia and about twelve percent of the Gross Domestic Product of the country , between 1994 and 1996 .
== Allergies ==
Some people are allergic to bananas .
There are two basic forms of these allergies .
The first is known as oral allergy syndrome .
Within an hour of eating a banana , swelling starts inside the mouth or throat .
This allergy is related to allergies caused by pollen , like that of the birch tree .
The other is similar to latex allergies .
It causes urticaria and potentially serious upper gastrointestinal symptoms .
== Other uses of bananas ==
=== Textiles ===
The fibre gained from the banana plant has been used to make textiles for a long time .
In Japan , bananas have been grown to be used for clothing and in the house since at least the 13th century .
In the Japanese system , the leaves and shoots are cut from the plant periodically to make sure they are soft .
The harvested shoots must first be boiled in lye to prepare the fibres for the making of the yarn .
These banana shoots produce fibres of varying degrees of softness .
They can be used for yarns and textiles of different qualties , and for specific uses .
For example , the outermost fibres of the shoots are the coarsest - they are good for tablecloths .
The softest innermost fibres are desirable for kimono and kamishimo .
This traditional Japanese banana cloth making process has many steps , all performed by hand.Another system is used in Nepal .
There the trunk of the banana plant is harvested instead .
Small pieces of this trunk are then softened .
The fibres are extracted mechanically , bleached , and dried .
They are then sent to the Kathmandu Valley , where high-end rugs are produced .
These rugs have a texture and general qualities similar to that of silk .
These banana fibre rugs are woven by traditional Nepalese hand-knotted methods .
==== What are the benefits of bananas ====
A medium-sized banana will provide around 320-400 mg of potassium , which meets about 10 of your daily potassium needs .
Potassium helps your body maintain a healthy heart and blood pressure .
In addition , bananas are low in sodium .
The low sodium and high potassium combination helps to control high blood pressure .
=== Paper ===
Banana fiber is also used to make banana paper .
There are two different kinds of banana paper : paper made from the bark , and paper made from the fibre and from unused fruits .
== Images ==
== Related pages ==
Banana bread == References ==
== Other websites ==
Media related to Banana at Wikimedia Commons bananas .
ssrichardmontgomery.com .
Retrieved 3 June 2010 .
Banana : Beneficial for Human .
healthmad.com .
Retrieved 3 June 2010 .
