A calendar is a tool for organizing days .
People use calendars to say when something happened , and for planning things that have not happened yet .
The calendar gives the days names and numbers , called calendar dates .
The dates are usually made based on how things in the sky seem to move .
The year and month are based on motions of the Sun and moon .
By knowing what day something happened or will happen , people have an easier life .
Since the beginning of history , knowing when the seasons would start for crops was very important for farmers and people who eat .
Calendar systems have a beginning time or era .
The calendar era is often a religion-based event , such as the birth of Jesus , but it may be a political event such as a coronation or the founding of a state .
Dates that are counted from the coronation are called regnal .
The three principal calendars most used today are the Gregorian , Hebrew , and Islamic calendars .
Other calendar systems from many different parts of the world are also used .
== Basis ==
Calendars are based on three natural things : The Earth turns all the way around its axis .
The Moon goes all the way around the Earth .
The Earth goes all the way around the Sun.The Earth turns all the way around its axis about 24 hours .
It is called the Solar Day .
Days of most calendars are strongly based on the Solar Day .
The Moon turns all the way around the Earth about 29 days , 12 hours , 44 minutes and 2 seconds .
Months of some calendars are still strongly based on the Moon .
These are called Lunar calendars , which lasts about 354-355 days .
Solar calendars ignore the moon , and depend entirely on the Sun .
The Earth goes all the way around the Sun in about 365 days , 5 hours , 48 minutes and 46 seconds .
This is called the Tropical Year .
Years of most calendars are strongly based on the Tropical Year .
== Related pages ==
Anno Domini ( AD ) Common Era ( CE ) Friday ( Muslim ) Saturday ( Jewish ) Sunday ( Christian ) Gregorian calendar ( Christian ) Hebrew calendar ( Jewish ) Islamic calendar ( Muslim ) == Other websites ==
Calendar for many years , for many countries Calendar -Citizendium
