The Mediterranean Sea is the body of water that separates Europe , Africa , and Asia .
The Mediterranean Sea is connected to the Atlantic Ocean by a narrow passage called the Strait of Gibraltar .
The sea is almost completely surrounded by land , on the north by Europe , on the south by North Africa , and on the east by the Middle East .
It covers around 2.5 million square kilometres ( 0.97 million square miles ) .
Its name was invented in the early middle ages from Latin words for in the middle of land .
To the east it connects to the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea , by the Dardanelles and the Bosporus .
The Sea of Marmara , which is an inner sea like the Black Sea , is rarely considered as a part of the Mediterranean Sea .
The much bigger Black Sea is generally not considered a part of the Mediterranean Sea .
The 163 km ( 101 mi ) long man-made Suez Canal in the southeast connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea .
The canal is between Egypt and the Sinai Peninsula , and was built by the French Compagnie Universelle du Canal Maritime de Suez from 1859 to 1869 .
== History ==
Some of the most ancient human civilizations were made around the Mediterranean Sea , so it has had a large influence on the history and ways of life of these cultures .
It provided a way of trade , colonization and war , and was the basis of life ( like fishing and catching other seafood ) for many communities throughout the ages .
The combination of similarly shared climate , geology and access to a common sea has led to lots of historical and cultural connections between the ancient and modern societies around the Mediterranean .
Above all , it was the superhighway of transport in ancient times .
It allowed for trade and cultural exchange between peoples of the region Phoenicians , Egyptians , Greeks , Hebrews , Minoans and Hittites on the eastern side of the mediterranean and the Carthaginians , Romans , Etruscans , Celtiberians , Gauls and Berbers on the western side .
The history of the Mediterranean is important in understanding the origin and development of Western civilization .
The ancient Punic Wars and the Battle of the Mediterranean during World War II gave the winners control over it so they could destroy the losers .
Today the Mediterranean Sea still connects the economies of Europe , North Africa , and the Middle East as it did in ancient times .
The European migrant crisis resulted in many refugees drowning in the Mediterranean Sea .
== Oceanography ==
Almost 6 million years ago , continental drift closed the Strait of Gibraltar .
With no water coming in from the Atlantic Ocean , the Mediterranean partly dried up .
The remaining part became extremely salty .
After half a million years the straits opened again , making the Mediterranean as it is now .
Being nearly landlocked affects the Mediterranean Sea 's properties .
Tides are limited by the narrow connection with the Atlantic Ocean .
The water is saltier , partly because of evaporation .
The Mediterranean has a deep blue color .
Evaporation greatly exceeds precipitation and surface runoff in the Mediterranean , a fact that is central to the water circulation within the basin .
Evaporation is especially high in its eastern half , causing the water level to decrease and salinity to increase eastward .
This pressure gradient pushes relatively cool , low-salinity water from the Atlantic across the basin ; it warms and becomes saltier as it travels east , then sinks in the region of the Levant and circulates westward , to spill over the Strait of Gibraltar .
Thus , seawater flow is eastward at the Strait 's surface , and westward near the bottom .
In the Atlantic , this chemically distinct deep Mediterranean Intermediate Water can persist thousands of kilometers away from its source .
== Related pages ==
Mediterranean climate == References ==
