An African American generally refers to a person who lives in the United States and speaks English , but whose ancestors were from Africa .
It could also describe a first generation African immigrant who has citizenship in the United States .
More rarely , it is used for people of African ancestry who live elsewhere in the Americas .
The term is usually associated with black people .
This is because of many African Americans ' dark skin due to having Sub-Saharan African ancestors .
Many Africans were brought to the United States in the slave trade .
Many of the U.S. population ( especially in many urban or city areas ) are African American .
Many others live in rural areas in the Southern United States .
Detroit has the highest percent of blacks in the nation , and many live in other big cities .
Cities with the highest percent of African Americans are Jackson , Mississippi ; New Orleans ; Memphis ; Miami Gardens ; and Savannah , Georgia .
New York City and Chicago have the largest population of African Americans .
Other cities with a high African American population are Baltimore , Houston , Atlanta , Philadelphia , Baton Rouge , Washington , D.C. and Dallas .
States with the highest percentage of African Americans are Mississippi , Louisiana , Georgia , Maryland , South Carolina , Alabama , Delaware , North Carolina , Virginia and Tennessee .
African Americans are third largest ethnic group in the United States after White Americans and Hispanic and Latino Americans .
== Ethnicity ==
African-American refers to a specific range of diverse cultures with a common thread of ethnic connection to Africa .
This term was created to describe an ethnic/cultural link to Africa for people who are American , much as in the case of Italian Americans , Irish Americans , or Polish Americans .
The difference is that Italian Americans and Polish Americans know they are Americans of Italian or Polish ( not general European ) descent .
The 'African ' in African-American acknowledges the connection to a number of African cultures , not one in particular .
The 'American ' shows the nationality and culture of the United States .
A person born in Nigeria is still Nigerian even if he or she comes to the United States and lives here for the rest of their life .
If that person wants to say that they are an American citizen , they would simply say I am an American citizen .
His American-born children could correctly call themselves Nigerian-American OR African-American .
Some Caribbeans such as Jamaicans do not identify as African American , even if they have African ancestry .
=== Black ===
In America , and from an American point of view , the term 'Black ' is often applied to other ethnic groups throughout the world who do not necessarily see themselves as Black , such as Australian Aborigines , for example .
African American culture was born in the United States and is distinct from any single African culture .
African-American is a term that many Black people chose to call themselves because they found the term Negro offensive .
In America there are many immigrants of mixed race that includes African descent , like Cape Verdeans , Dominicans , Cubans , Brazilians and Puerto Ricans .
These groups , by and large , do not think of themselves as Black or African American and object to these labels .
Many mixed race Americans also resist pressure to identify themselves as Black or White .
Blasians and Afro-Hispanics also resist pressure .
=== Genetic studies ===
Many African Americans have European ancestry and Native American along with African ancestry .
Recent surveys of African Americans using a genetic testing service have found varied ancestries .
These studies found that on average , African Americans have 73.2–82.1 West African , 16.7 European , and 0.8–1.2 Native American genetic ancestry , with large variation between individuals .
Genetics websites themselves have reported similar ranges , with some finding 1 or 2 percent Native American ancestry and Ancestry.com reporting an outlying percentage of European ancestry among African Americans of 29 .
38 of African Americans have Irish ancestry .
== History ==
Most of the first African Americans were brought to North America as part of the Atlantic slave trade .
African slaves were brought to North America from 1619 to 1808 .
After the United States became independent , slavery became illegal in most northern states .
At the same time , slavery grew more important to the economy of the southern states .
Many African American slaves worked on plantations that grew cotton and tobacco .
Plantation work was very difficult and slaves were often whipped and physically punished .
It was illegal for slaves to learn how to read and write .
White men often raped black women , but were not punished.At the same time , there were many free African Americans in the north .
Unlike slaves , they were allowed to start churches , write newspapers , and sometimes own property .
Frederick Douglass was an important abolitionist ( fighter against slavery ) .
Harriet Tubman helped to create the Underground Railroad , which helped African Americans to sneak away from their masters and become free .
During the American Civil War from 1861-1865 , the south broke away from the United States to form the Confederate States of America , or Confederacy .
The United States won the war , and in 1865 , it freed all slaves ( about 4 million ) by the 13th amendment .
African Americans were not slaves anymore , but white southerners passed laws called Black Codes that took away their freedom .
Some African Americans served in government , but after 1877 , the white southerners mostly kept them out of government .
Whites founded the Ku Klux Klan to scare African Americans and stop them from voting .
Most southern African Americans became sharecroppers .
Sharecropping was a system in which the farmers rented the land from the landowner and had to pay the landowner part of their crops .
Jim Crow laws segregated white and black people .
Black people had to go to different schools and usually live in different neighborhoods than white people .
Many businesses were for whites only .
The Supreme Court case Plessy Ferguson said that black and white facilities could be separate but equal , but facilities for black people were usually worse .
Lynching was often practiced against African Americans .
In the early 1900s , African American culture grew with the Harlem Renaissance , an artistic and literary movement in New York City .
The NAACP was founded to improve the lives of African Americans .
Leaders had different ideas about what was best for African Americans .
Booker Washington thought they should go to vocational schools to get better jobs .
B .
Du Bois thought university education was more important .
Marcus Garvey believed that African Americans should move to Africa to have a country of their own .
During the Great Migration , from the 1910s to the 1960s , African Americans moved from the south to cities in the north and west .
At the beginning , only 10 of African Americans lived outside the south , but by the end , 47 lived in the north and west .
Segregation also existed in the north .
Redlining stopped people who lived in African American neighborhoods from buying homes .
In the 1950s and 1960s , the Civil Rights Movement called for equality between African Americans and whites .
The 1954 Supreme Court case Brown Board of Education banned racial segregation in schools .
Many Southern schools still stopped black students from attending , until 1957 , when federal troops forced a school in Little Rock , Arkansas to allow black students ( called the Little Rock Nine ) .
In 1955 , Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on a segregated bus .
This started the Montgomery Bus Boycott , which involved Martin Luther King .
King and Malcolm X were two leaders of the Civil Rights Movement , but they were both killed in the 1960s .
In 1964 , the Civil Rights Act banned discrimination based on race .
== Language and society ==
With their American born children came the first generation of English speaking African Americans .
But this development was not the same all over the country .
For example ; even today the Gullah of the Sea Islands off the Carolina and Georgia coasts still speak a language that is a blend of several African languages .
They are the descendants of slaves from different countries in Africa .
In the United States when Americans say African-American or Black , they are referring to the same people .
Both terms describe an ethnic group that came to exist in the United States .
The Africans who were brought to America as slaves were from different nationalities and did not all speak the same language .
They became a new blended ethnic group with a new language that was not their own : English .
Blacks used to be segregated in schools but since the 1960s were able to join major schools , colleges and universities .
In the second half of the 20th century , reading-ability rates for blacks increased .
== Culture ==
African Americans have influenced various forms of music , including Hip hop , R B , funk , rock and roll , soul , blues , and other contemporary American musical forms while older black forms of music included blues , doo-wop , barbershop , ragtime , bluegrass , jazz , and gospel music .
Michael Jackson , an African-American pop singer , released an album called Thriller in 1982 which is the best-selling album of all time .
In the nineties Beyonce Knowles became famous as the lead singer of the R B girl band Destiny 's Child .
In the 2000s she started releasing music on her own .
Her first album Dangerously in Love sold 11 million copies and won five Grammy Awards .
African-American rappers Lil Wayne , Jay-Z , Kanye West , 50 Cent , Flo Rida and Drake are considered one of the best selling artists .
Gangsta rap such as 50 Cent and G-Unit is popular African-American music.Black culture has been the subject of documentaries .
For example , the award-winning Black Is , Black Ai n't explores black identity .
Good Hair discusses the significance of having 'good hair ' for black women in American culture .
There is a National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington D.C. Protestant Christianity is the most practised religion by African Americans .
Soul food is a cuisine eaten by African Americans in the South .
Fried chicken , mac and cheese , cornbread , collard greens and candied yams is typical soul food .
Kwanzaa and Juneteenth are popular African American holidays .
Popular African-American fashions are hip-hop such as durags , saggying jeans and grills .
African American hairstyles include dreadlocks and cornrows .
== Racism and issues ==
African Americans are more likely to experience racism .
African American males are more likely to be killed by police , which resulted in the Black Lives Matter movement .
African Americans are more likely to die from diseases like COVID-19 , HIV , obesity and diabetes .
African Americans still suffer from poverty and unemployment .
African Americans are more likely to drugs like marijuana .
African Americans are more likely to eat fast food .
Heart disease , diabetes , cancer , and homicide is the main causes of death for African Americans .
The suicide rate for African Americans increased due to racism , police brutality and the COVID-19 pandemic .
== Pictures ==
== Related pages ==
African American Vernacular English Black Lives Matter African-American music Slavery in the United States Atlantic slave trade == References ==
