The American Civil War ( 1861–1865 ) was a civil war in the United States of America .
It is sometimes called The War Between the States .
The war was fought because eleven Southern states wanted to leave the United States of America .
They formed the Confederate States of America , also called the Confederacy .
The U.S. government and the states that remained loyal to it were called the Union .
The main cause of the war was slavery .
Slavery was common in the Southern states , including all 11 that joined the Confederate states .
It was illegal in most of the Northern states .
The Confederate states tried to leave the Union after Abraham Lincoln , who disliked slavery , was elected President of the United States .
The Union believed that it was illegal for the states to break away .
Five states where slavery was legal stayed in the Union .
These were called the border states .
At first , the Union did not plan to end slavery if it won .
This changed in 1862 .
The war began on April 12 , 1861 when Confederate forces attacked Fort Sumter , a fort in South Carolina held by Union soldiers .
It lasted four years and caused much damage in the South .
Most battles were in northern states until 1862 and in southern states after 1862 .
After four years of fighting , the Union won the war .
After the Union won , slavery was made illegal everywhere in the United States .
== Background ==
When the United States of America was founded in 1776 , most states allowed slavery .
But over the next 84 years , the Northern states decided that slavery was a bad thing and ended it .
The Southern states kept slavery legal .
Slaves from Africa grew tobacco , cotton and other cash crops in those states , which made a lot of money for businesses in the north and south .
The United States became divided into slave and free states .
By 1860 , those groups were angry at each other .
At this stage , few people wanted to end slavery in the south .
Instead , they argued about whether slavery should be allowed to spread to the territories and new states in the west .
In the late 1850s , there was fighting in Kansas between people who wanted Kansas to allow slavery and those who did not .
Abraham Lincoln from the Republican Party won the 1860 United States presidential election .
At that time , Lincoln did not want to ban slavery .
Like everyone else , he believed that the United States Constitution did not allow the federal government to ban slavery ( the amendment to ban slavery had not yet been passed ) .
He also thought that banning it suddenly would damage the South .
Instead , Lincoln and the Republican Party thought it would be enough to not let slavery start in the west .
They thought slavery would die out on its own if no one let it spread to new places .
Lincoln became president on March 4 , 1861 .
In the four month gap between the election and the day Lincoln became president , seven Southern states declared their independence from the Union .
The outgoing U.S. president , James Buchanan , said this was against the law , but he did nothing to stop them .
Lincoln and his Republican party treated this secession as a rebellion .
No country ever recognized the Confederacy as its own , separate nation .
This was because of diplomacy on the part of the Union , anti-slavery feelings in Europe and the northern blockade of southern ports .
The first seven states to join the Confederacy were South Carolina , Mississippi , Florida , Alabama , Georgia , Louisiana and Texas .
Four others joined after fighting began : Virginia , Arkansas , Tennessee and North Carolina .
The Confederacy claimed Kentucky and Missouri belonged to them , but these states never joined the Confederacy .
Kentucky , Missouri and Maryland were slave states that tried to avoid taking sides .
Delaware supported the Union despite being a slave state .
Also , the western counties of Virginia chose to remain in the Union , creating a new state called West Virginia .
== Fighting begins ==
Fighting started when the Confederates shot and threw bombs at Fort Sumter , a Union Army fort .
Lincoln then asked the Union states to bring soldiers to fight the Confederates.The Confederate States said all forts and other federal buildings in the South belonged to them .
Fort Sumter was in South Carolina , one of the Confederate States .
However , the fort was controlled by the Union .
On April 12 , 1861 , Confederate forces attacked the fort .
They forced the Union soldiers inside the fort to surrender .
After this , President Lincoln asked every Union state for volunteers to join the Union Army .
Four more southern slave states joined the Confederates instead of supplying forces to fight against them .
The United States Navy stopped other ships from going in or out of southern ports .
This stopped the Confederacy from selling its cotton and other goods .
It also made it harder for them to buy weapons and military supplies .
== The war ==
The American Civil War was fought in three important land areas , or theaters .
The Eastern theater was all land east of the Appalachian Mountains .
The Western theater included everything between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River and along the river .
The Trans-Mississippi theater included territory west of the Mississippi River .
Both the United States and the Confederacy had their capital cities in the Eastern theater .
Washington D.C. had been the capital of the U.S. since 1800 .
When the South seceded , its first capital was Montgomery , Alabama but they changed it to Richmond , Virginia .
Richmond and Washington are only about 90 miles ( 145 km ) apart .
One of the first battles of the war was fought in Virginia .
This First Battle of Bull Run happened on July 21 , 1861 .
The Confederates won the battle .
The Union Army of the Potomac then tried to capture Richmond in the Peninsula Campaign during the spring of 1862 .
At this time , Robert Lee became leader of the Army of Northern Virginia and defeated the Union army .
He then won the Second Battle of Bull Run in August 1862 .
Lee tried to win the war by invading Maryland .
When he lost the Battle of Antietam , he retreated back to Virginia .
There was much fighting between ships in the American Civil War but the Union had a stronger and bigger navy .
Lincoln put the Confederates under a blockade , which meant the Union navy would not let any ships into or out of southern ports .
The Confederates used ships called blockade runners to bring things from Europe .
The things the Confederates brought included weapons .
The navies of each side also fought on the rivers .
The ships included ironclads , which were protected by iron on their sides , and cottonclads , which used cotton along their sides .
During the Battle of Hampton Roads , the Confederate ironclad Virginia fought against the Union ironclad Monitor .
This was the first time in world history that two ironclads fought each other .
In the Western theater , much of the fighting happened along the Mississippi River .
Ulysses Grant was an important Union general in the west .
The Confederates tried to send their soldiers into the state of Kentucky during the summer of 1861 .
During the early months of 1862 , the Union army made the Confederates retreat from Kentucky and from western Tennessee .
The Confederates tried to recapture western Tennessee by attacking Grant 's army at the Battle of Shiloh .
Grant won the battle .
The Confederates then tried to send their soldiers into eastern Kentucky during the fall of 1862 .
They left Kentucky after losing the Battle of Perryville .
The North won control of almost all of the Mississippi River by capturing the cities along the river .
This happened during the fall of 1862 and spring of 1863 .
However , the Confederacy still held Vicksburg , an important city and fort .
If they held the city , the Confederates could move soldiers and supplies from one side of the river to the other .
Grant started the Siege of Vicksburg during the month of May 1863 .
The siege continued for a long time .
On July 4 , 1863 , the Confederates in Vicksburg surrendered to Grant .
This was one of the turning points in the war , because it divided the Confederacy into two parts .
There were also battles west of the Mississippi river valley , in the Trans-Mississippi theater .
For example , two important battles were the Battle of Wilson 's Creek and the Battle of Pea Ridge .
The Confederates tried to invade New Mexico during February and March 1862 but they were defeated at the Battle of Glorieta Pass .
After the Union captured Vicksburg , this area became separated from the rest of the Confederate states .
Other battles happened in this area after the capture of Vicksburg .
During the siege of Vicksburg in the west , another turning point came in the east .
After winning some battles , Lee decided to invade the North again .
Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia went into Pennsylvania .
The Confederate Army met the Union Army near Gettysburg , Pennsylvania .
The two armies fought the Battle of Gettysburg .
This battle lasted for three days : July 1 to 3 , 1863 .
More soldiers died at Gettysburg than in any other Civil War battle .
The Union won the battle .
This meant the Confederate Army 's had to stop invading the North .
Lee and his troops were pushed back into the South .
After this , President Lincoln decided that Grant was his best general .
He put Grant in control of all the Union armies .
Lincoln also made William Sherman the general in charge of the Union troops in Georgia .
Grant led many attacks on Lee 's army .
These battles were made up the Overland Campaign .
Meanwhile , Sherman burned Atlanta and Savannah .
He did this to try to make the South weaker and to make it harder for Southern people to supply the Confederate Army with food and other necessities .
Sherman then marched north through South Carolina and North Carolina .
Confederate general Joseph Johnston attacked Sherman at the Battle of Bentonville .
Sherman won the battle .
Even in the 20th century , southerners remember Sherman 's march as destroying many homes , farms and railroads , but Sherman 's soldiers are blamed for things that happened far away from where they were .
Eventually , Lee decided that he had too few soldiers to keep on fighting the Union , which had more soldiers and supplies .
Lee surrendered to Grant on April 9 , 1865 , near Appomattox Court House .
After Lee surrendered , many other Confederate armies surrendered also .
The last Confederate general to surrender was Brigadier General Stand Watie .
He surrendered on June 23 , 1865 , in Oklahoma .
After the war ended , President Lincoln pardoned all of the Confederate soldiers .
This meant the Confederate soldiers would not be arrested or punished for fighting against the Union .
The southern states would be allowed to rejoin the United States again , but not immediately .
Some Confederates did not want to return to the United States .
Some of these people moved to México or Brazil .
== Inflation ==
During the war , inflation was a problem in the Union and a bigger problem in the Confederacy whose government paid for the war by printing a large amount of paper money .
Prices went up and everything became more expensive .
Many people could not afford the higher prices and went hungry because of this .
This was one thing that helped lead to the Confederacy 's surrender .
== After the war ==
Many soldiers on both sides died during the war .
Most of the war was fought in the South .
Many railroads , farms , houses and other things were destroyed and most people there became very poor .
The period after the war , called Reconstruction , lasted from the end of the war until 1877 .
The Union Army stayed in some Southern states , making them occupied territory .
Three important amendments were added on to the United States Constitution .
The amendments were proposed ( or suggested ) by the U.S. government .
Although not every American supported them , the amendments got enough support to pass : The 13th Amendment said that slavery is not allowed anywhere in the United States .
This completed the work of the Emancipation Proclamation .
The 14th Amendment made it clear that all people born in the United States were citizens with equal rights .
The 15th Amendment said that people in the United States could not be kept from voting because of their race.After the war , some of the Union Army 's leaders went into politics .
Generals Grant , Hayes , Garfield , Harrison and McKinley became presidents .
Other veterans were elected to other offices .
The southern states were allowed to ask to rejoin the union .
Only after that could they send senators and representatives to the United States Congress again and make their own state laws .
During Reconstruction , black Americans built schools and other social infrastructure .
Some of these schools became the historically black colleges that are still in the United States today .
After southern states rejoined the Union , most of them made laws that limited what black people could do .
The Amnesty Act of 1872 restored the rights to vote and to hold political office for most of the former members of the Confederacy .
Some of them also became politicians .
== References ==
== Other sources ==
Gibboney , Douglas Lee .
Tragic Glory : A Concise , Illustrated History of the Civil War .
Fredericksburg , Virginia : Sergeant Kirkland 's , 1997 .
ISBN 1-887901-17-5 .
Roland , Charles An American Iliad : The Story of the Civil War .
New York : McGraw-Hill , 2002 .
ISBN 0-07-241815-X .
== Other websites ==
Civilwar.com American Civil War Citizendium
