Greek mythology is a large collection of stories , started in Ancient Greece , about the beginning of the world , and the lives and adventures of gods , goddesses , heroes , and heroines .
== Gods and goddesses ==
The gods and goddesses in Greek mythology have special parts in the world .
For instance , Zeus is the god of the sky , Poseidon is the god of the sea and Hephaestus is the god of metal work , forging and fire .
They can make themselves invisible to humans and move to any place in a very short amount of time .
Gods and goddesses also never get sick and can only be hurt by very unusual causes .
This is called being immortal .
The king of the gods was Zeus .
The gods were children of the Titans such as Kronos and Rhea .
Greek mythology has thirteen main gods known as the Twelve Olympians plus Hades , the brother of Zeus .
They were Zeus , Poseidon , Hera , Hephaestus , Dionysus , Athena , Artemis , Apollo , Ares , Demeter , Aphrodite and Hermes .
Before them there were the twelve Titans .
== The myth of the Sun ==
The Greeks believed that the sun was pulled across the sky by a chariot driven by the god , Apollo , ( Or Helios , as some say , the titan who drove the 'sun chariot ' across the sky before his successor Apollo ) and he himself was the god of archery , poetry , and Oracles .
Every day , Apollo would drive the Sun Chariot across the sky .
== The Greek creation myth ==
The Ancient Greeks believed that in the beginning , the world was in a state of nothingness which they called Chaos .
Suddenly , from light , came Gaia ( Mother Earth ) and from her came Uranus ( the sky ) along with other old gods ( called primordials ) like Pontus ( the primordial god of the oceans ) .
Gaia and Uranus had 12 children , the Titans .
The most important of the 12 children were Kronos and Rhea .
Gaia gave birth to some monsters called cyclops and the hundred handed ones .
Uranus disgusted by the monsters threw them in Tartarus .
Gaia , angered by Uranus , sought revenge on Uranus .
Gaia used her son Kronos , who chopped off Uranus ' genitals .
Kronos threw Uranus into the ocean .
From the blood of his genitals , came the goddess of love and beauty—Aphrodite .
Kronos married his sister Rhea and gave birth to 6 children , who were called the gods .
Kronos , who was afraid of a prophecy delivered to him a while ago ( which stated that one day his children would cut him up ) , swallowed each of his children each time they were born .
Rhea did not like this , so she saved Zeus and gave Kronos a rock to eat instead .
Zeus was raised by a goat named Amaltheia , in a mountain cave located in Crete .
When Zeus was old enough , he tricked Kronos into drinking a mixture of wine and mustard .
Kronos vomited up the rest of the gods , who , being immortal , had been growing up completely undigested in Kronos ' stomach .
Zeus and other gods then had a big war with the Titans .
Zeus won with the help of the hundred handed ones and the cyclops .
After they won the war Zeus cut Kronos into pieces and threw them into Tartarus .
Zeus was from then on the leader of the gods , Poseidon took over the oceans and Hades took over the Underworld .
Zeus married his sister Hera and crowned her Queen of Olympus .
Men were created by the Titan Prometheus , who did not participate in the war .
== Related pages ==
List of Greek gods and goddesses List of people in Greek mythology Mythology Roman mythology == References ==
