Yoga is an old discipline from India .
It is both spiritual and physical .
Yoga uses breathing techniques , exercise and meditation .
It helps to improve health and happiness .
Yoga is the Sanskrit word for union .
Patanjali was a pioneer of classical yoga .
He defined yoga as the cessation of the modification of the mind ( stopping changing the mind ) .
A person doing yoga will move from one posture ( called asana ) to another .
For example , the sun-salutation contains 12 poses of asanas , one after the other , and is said to help balance body and soul .
There is a specific mantra for each asana .
The sun-salutation is popularly known as Suryanamaskar .
== History ==
Yoga was introduced by Indian Ascetic .
Ascetic practices ( tapas ) are referenced in the Brāhmaṇas ( 900 to 500 BC ) , early commentaries on the Vedas .
Several seals discovered at Indus Valley Civilization ( B.C . )
sites in Pakistan depict figures in positions resembling a common yoga or meditation pose .
The pose shows a form of ritual discipline , suggesting a precursor of yoga , according to archaeologist Gregory Possehl .
Scholars think there must be some type of connection between the Indus Valley seals and later yoga and meditation practices , though there is no conclusive evidence .
Jonathan Mark Kenoyer describes one figure as seated in yogic position .
Karel Werner writes that Archeological discoveries allow us therefore to speculate with some justification that a wide range of Yoga activities was already known to the people of pre-Aryan India .
== Important yoga words ( ashtang yoga ) == Yama : Positive Rules of meditations Niyama : Prohibitory Rules of meditations Asanas : Physical postures and movements Pranayama : Breathing techniques Pratyahara : Controlling the mind Dharana : Gazing inward Dhyana : Meditation with object Samadhi : Meditation without object == Types of yoga ==
Classification based on mind and body .
Rajayoga : Raja yoga focuses on meditation and contemplation in order to fully realize the self .
Hathayoga : Hatha yoga is the practice of yoga postures , or asana , using the body as a vehicle for self-transformation .
Classification based on way of spiritual life .
Gyanyoga : It is a way of knowledge .
Karmayoga : It is a way of work .
Bhaktiyoga : It is a way of worship .
Classification based on a way of other things .
Swaryoga : Emphasizes the most on breathing .
Kriyayoga : Emphasizes the most on blending Karmayoga ( Tapa ) , Gyanyoga ( Swadhyay ) and Bhaktiyoga ( Ishwar Pranidhan ) .
== Some popular Yogasanas ==
A yogasana is a pose in which a person can sit .
The intention of yogasana is to exercise the body and make it free of pains and problems .
Yogi is a person who has mastered yoga or has achieved great success in yoga .
Yogasanas are also called Asana or Asanas ( plural ) .
A Yogi can sit in any asana for a given time .
PawanmuktasanaThis yogasana helps to release gas in the stomach .
UshtrasanaThis yogasana makes the spine more relaxed .
== References ==
== Other websites ==
