World War I ( WWI or WW1 ) , also called the First World War , began on July 28 , 1914 and lasted until November 11 , 1918 .
The war was a global war that lasted exactly 4 years , 3 months and 14 days .
Most of the fighting was in Europe , but soldiers from many other countries took part , and it changed the colonial empires of the European powers .
Before World War II began in 1939 , World War I was called the Great War or the World War .
135 countries took part in World War I , and nearly 10 million people died while fighting.Before the war , European countries had formed alliances with each other to protect themselves .
However , by doing this they had divided themselves into two groups .
When Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated on 28 June 1914 , Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia and declared war on them .
Serbia 's ally Russia then declared war on Austria-Hungary .
This set off a chain of events in which the two groups of countries declared war on each other .
The two sides were the Allied Powers ( mainly Russia , France and the British Empire ) and the Central Powers ( mainly Germany , Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire ) .
There was fighting in many different areas ( fronts ) .
The French and British fought the Germans on the Western Front in France and Belgium .
Germany had tried to defeat France quickly , but were stopped in the First Battle of the Marne .
After that , most of the fighting here was trench warfare .
The Russians fought the Germans and Austro-Hungarians on the Eastern Front in Central and Eastern Europe .
Fighting here was not trench warfare but mobile warfare .
The other main areas of fighting were in the Middle East , in the Gallipoli region of Turkey and between Italy and Austria-Hungary .
Fighting also took place in Africa , China , and at sea as well as in the air .
World War I was the first major war where tanks , airplanes , and submarines ( or U-boats ) were important weapons .
In 1917 , the Russians had a revolution , which led to them leaving the war in March 1918 .
Also in 1917 , the United States entered the war , though it took a year for their main army to arrive .
In the gap between when the Russians left and the Americans arrived , the Germans launched a huge attack in March 1918 to try to win the war , but it was not enough .
In August-November 1918 , the Allied Powers won a big victory against the Germans in the Hundred Days Offensive .
Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire then agreed to stop fighting .
The German government collapsed and a new government agreed to end the war on 11 November .
The war was ended by the signing of many different treaties , the most important being the Treaty of Versailles .
It also led to the creation of the League of Nations , which was meant to prevent wars .
People were shocked by the size of the war , how many people it killed and how much damage it caused .
They hoped it would be the war to end all wars .
Instead , it led to another , larger world war 21 years later .
== Beginning ==
By 1914 , trouble was on the rise in Europe .
Many countries feared invasion from the other .
For example , Germany was becoming increasingly powerful , and the British saw this as a threat to the British Empire .
The countries formed alliances to protect themselves , but this divided them into two groups .
Germany and Austria-Hungary had been allies since 1879 .
They had then formed the Triple Alliance with Italy in 1882 .
France and Russia became allies in 1894 .
They then joined with Britain to form the Triple Entente .
In 1908 , Austria-Hungary had taken over Bosnia , a region next to Serbia .
Some people living in Bosnia were Serbian , and wanted the area to be part of Serbia .
One of these was the Black Hand organization .
They sent men to kill Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria when he visited Sarajevo , the capital of Bosnia .
They all failed to kill him with grenades while he passed through a large crowd .
But one of them , a Serbian student named Gavrilo Princip , shot him and his pregnant wife with a pistol .
Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia for the assassination .
Germany supported Austria-Hungary and promised full support should it come to war .
Austria-Hungary sent a July Ultimatum to Serbia , listing 10 very strict rules they would have to agree to .
Many historians think that Austria-Hungary already wanted a war with Serbia .
Serbia agreed to most of the ten rules on the list , but not all of them .
Austria-Hungary then declared war on Serbia .
This quickly led to a full-scale war .
Both countries ' allies became involved in the war in a matter of days .
Russia joined the war on Serbia 's side because the people of Serbia were Slavic , for example Russia , and the Slavic countries had agreed to help each other if they were attacked .
Since Russia is a large country it had to move soldiers closer to the war , but Germany feared that Russia 's soldiers would also attack Germany .
Russia did not like Germany because of things Germany had done in the past to become stronger .
Germany declared war on Russia , and began to carry out a plan created long before to fight a war in Europe .
Because Germany is in the middle of Europe , Germany could not attack to the east towards Russia without weakening itself in the west , towards France .
Germany 's plan involved quickly defeating France in the west before Russia was ready to fight , and then moving her armies to the east to face Russia .
Germany could not quickly invade France directly , because France had put a lot of forts on the border , so Germany invaded the neighboring country of Belgium to then invade France through the undefended French/Belgian border .
Great Britain then joined the war , saying they wanted to protect Belgium .
Some historians think that even if Germany had stayed out of Belgium , the British would have still joined the war to help France .
Soon most of Europe became involved .
The Ottoman Empire ( now Turkey ) joined the war on the side of Germany and Austria-Hungary .
It is not clear why they entered or chose to fight on their side , but they had become friendly to Germany .
Although Italy was allied with German and Austria-Hungary , they had only agreed to fight if those countries were attacked first .
Italy said that because Austria-Hungary had attacked Serbia first , they did not need to fight .
They also did not like Austria-Hungary .
Italy joined the war in 1915 on the Allied Powers ' side .
== Germany vs Russia ==
Germany was allied with Austria-Hungary .
Russia was allied with Serbia .
The German government was afraid that because Austria-Hungary had attacked Serbia , Russia would attack Austria-Hungary to help Serbia .
Because of this , Germany felt it had to help Austria-Hungary by attacking Russia first , before it could attack Austria-Hungary .
The problem was that Russia was also friends with France , and the Germans thought the French might attack them to help Russia .
So the Germans decided that they could win the war if they attacked France first , and quickly .
They could mobilize very quickly .
They had a list of all the men who had to join the army , and where those men had to go , and the times of every train that would carry those men to where they would have to fight .
France was doing the same thing , but could not do it as quickly .
The Germans thought that if they attacked France first , they could 'knock France ' out of the war before Russia could attack them .
Russia had a big army , but Germany thought that it would take six weeks to mobilize and a long time before they could attack the Central Powers .
That was n't true , because the Russian Army mobilized in ten days .
Also , the Russians drove deep into Austria .
== Britain vs Germany ==
Britain was allied with Belgium , and became quickly involved in the war .
Britain had promised to protect Belgian neutrality .
Germany passed through Belgium to reach Paris before Russia could mobilize and open up a second front against them .
On August 4 , 1914 , Britain declared war against Germany in support of Belgium .
Britain had the biggest empire ( it ruled over a quarter of the world ) .
If Germany conquered France , it might take Britain and France 's colonies and become the most powerful and biggest empire in the world .
Britain was also worried about Germany 's growing military power .
Germany was developing its large army into one of the most powerful in the world .
The British Army was quite small .
The British Royal Navy was the largest and best in the world , and in the 19th century that was enough to keep other naval powers from attacking .
Germany was a land power , and Britain was a sea power .
But now the Germans were building a large navy .
This was seen as a threat to Britain .
However , the decision to declare war was taken under its alliance with Belgium in the Treaty of London ( 1839 ) .
The Government might have decided differently .
No-one foresaw how long the war would last , and what the terrible costs would be .
== Turkey ==
The Ottoman Empire ( Turkey ) went into the war because it was secretly allied to Germany and two Turkish warships manned by German Navy personnel bombarded Russian towns .
Britain also fought against Turkey because the Ottoman Empire was supporting Germany .
Britain did not have any animosity towards the Turks .
However , by fighting the Turks in the Mesopotamia region ( in what is now called Iraq ) , in the Arabian Peninsula and other places , Britain was able to defeat them with help from the British Indian Army .
Later , after the War ended , Britain was able to get some areas from the old Turkish empire which was breaking up , and to add them to the British Empire.Greece went into the war because its leader supported the Allied cause .
Greece and Serbia had become independent , but many Greeks still lived in lands that were once Greek but were now in the Turkish Ottoman Empire .
Having recently won the Balkan Wars , the Greeks especially wanted to control other land to the north that was under Bulgarian and Turkish rule , so they declared war .
Turkey killed most of the Greek army as the Greeks tried to regain parts of Turkey .
Another war started when the Greeks bombed a train .
Turkey swept Greece back into their own territory .
From then on the Greeks never again declared war , while Turkey had one of the biggest armies in the world .
== Bulgaria vs Serbia and Greece ==
Bulgaria , like Greece and Serbia , was owned by Turkey before Bulgaria broke away from Turkey .
Bulgaria claimed a lot of Turkish land as belonging to Bulgaria .
The Serbians and Greeks felt cheated because they felt the land belonged to Greece or Serbia .
The Greeks and Serbians took back the land which angered Bulgaria and led to the country becoming allies with Turkey .
They declared war on Serbia and Greece , But Bulgaria lost this war .
== Russian Revolution ==
The Russian Revolution makes Russia fight Germany and the Bolshevik at the same time .
And Russia surrendered to Germany due to the fact that its fighting against the Soviets .
It needed to get out of the war , pay Germany lots of German marks .
== Important events in the war ==
Most people thought the war would be short .
They thought the armies would move around quickly to attack each other and one would defeat the other without too many people getting killed .
They thought the war would be about brave soldiers they did not understand how war had changed .
Only a few people , for example Lord Kitchener said that the war would take a long time .
Germany 's generals had decided that the best way to defeat France was to go through Belgium using a plan called the Schlieffen Plan .
This was invented by the German Army Chief of Staff , Alfred Von Schlieffen .
They could then attack the French army at the north side and the south side at the same time .
The German Army went into Belgium on August the 4th .
On the same day , Great Britain started a war on Germany , because Britain was a friend of Belgium .
The British had said some time before , in 1839 , that they would not let anyone control Belgium , and they kept their promise .
When the Germans got to the Belgian city of Liège , the Belgians fought very hard to stop them from coming into the city .
The Germans did finally push the Belgians out of the city , but it had taken longer than the German generals had planned .
Then the Germans attacked the north side of the French army .
The French and the British moved men up to fight the Germans .
They could do this because the Belgians had fought so long at Liège .
But the Germans pushed the French back at the frontiers , and the British held the Germans back at Mons , but afterwards they also fell back to join up with the retreating French army , until they were stopped at the river Marne .
This was the First Battle of the Marne or Miracle of the Marne .
In the East , the Russians had attacked the Germans .
The Russians pushed back the Germans , but then the Germans defeated the Russians at the Battle of Tannenberg .
== Trench warfare ==
Trench warfare killed great numbers of soldiers .
New weapons , such as machine guns , and long-range artillery had an increased rate of fire that cut down huge numbers of soldiers during mass charges , a tactic leftover from older warfare .
The men on both sides took spades and dug holes , because they did not want to be killed .
The holes joined up into trenches , until the lines of trenches went all the way from Switzerland to the North Sea .
In front of the trenches , there was barbed wire that cut anyone who tried to climb over it , and land mines that blew up anyone who tried to cross .
Late in the war , poison gas was also an important weapon .
The new machine guns , artillery , trenches and mines made it very difficult to attack .
The generals had fought many wars without these , so they ordered their armies to attack in the old style of marching in rows- allowing the enemy to shoot them down easily .
At the Battle of the Somme in 1916 60,000 British men died in a single day .
It was one of the bloodiest days in the history of the British army .
Late in the war the British and French invented tanks and used them to attack entrenched Germans but could not make enough of them to make a big difference .
The Germans invented special Sturmabteilung tactics to infiltrate enemy positions , but they also were too little , too late .
The British used whistles to communicate to other soldiers , so before they shelled the German trenches , they would sound the whistle .
However , the Germans caught on to this tactic after a while , so after the shelling , when the British soldiers came to finish off the German soldiers , the Germans were ready with their machine guns , because they knew the British were coming .
== Airplanes ==
Airplanes were first used extensively in World War I .
Airplanes were not used very much in fighting before World War I .
It was the first war to use airplanes as weapons .
Airplanes were first used for reconnaissance , to take pictures of enemy land and to direct artillery .
Generals , military leaders , were using airplanes as an important part of their attack plans at the end of the war .
World War I showed that airplanes could be important war weapons .
Airplanes in World War I were made of wood and canvas , a type of rough cloth .
They did not last for a long time .
They could not fly very fast at the beginning of the war .
They could only fly up to 116 kilometers per hour , or 72 miles per hour .
At the end of the war they could fly up to 222 kilometres per hour ( 138 miles per hour ) .
But they could not fly as fast as planes today .
Guns were put on planes for the first time during the war .
Pilots , people who fly the plane , used the guns to shoot enemy planes .
One pilot used metal sheets , pieces of metal , to armor his airplane .
Other pilots began using metal sheets , too .
Pilots also made their airplanes better with machine guns , guns that shoot bullets much faster .
Machine guns made fighting harder and more dangerous between airplanes .
Pilots had to wear certain clothes when flying an airplane in World War I because they flew high where the air is cold .
The pilot 's clothes kept them warm and protected them from the wind and cold .
Pilots wore a leather coat to protect their bodies .
They wore a padded helmet and goggles , large glasses with special lenses , to protect their head and face .
They wore a scarf around their neck .
The scarf kept the wind from blowing against their neck when they turned their head .
== USA vs Germany ==
The German leaders decided to use submarines .
These submarines were named U-boats , from the German word Unterseeboot ( meaning underwater boat ) .
The U-boats attacked passenger ships such as RMS Lusitania carrying civilians to Great Britain .
They did not follow the laws of war , because the British would be able to destroy them if they did .
America was selling weapons to Germany 's enemies but not to Germany , thus not being neutral .
Neutral means a country is not involved in the war .
Many American and British noncombatants were killed by the submarines .
Germany also wrote a secret telegram note to Mexico in code suggesting that the two countries work together to attack the United States .
This note is called the Zimmerman Telegram because Arthur Zimmerman sent it .
It offered Mexico land in the southwestern United States that the United States took in previous wars .
Spies from the United Kingdom found out about the note and told the United States .
American people became angry and many decided that they wanted their country to enter the war against Germany .
For these and other reasons , on April 6 , 1917 the United States declared war against Germany and became part of the Allies .
== Russia ==
The defeat of Russia on the Eastern Front caused unrest inside the Empire .
=== The First Russian Revolution ===
In 1917 , there was a revolution in Russia .
The Tsar Nicholas II had to say he would not be Tsar any more , and that the people should have power .
At first it was thought that Russia would fight harder now that the Tsar was gone .
However , the Russian people did not want to fight anymore , because there was not sufficient food , appropriate armament , or adequate roads to supply its army .
The war had been putting burdens on them , and many of them were poor and hungry .
They began to hate their new government because it would not stop the war .
=== The Second Russian Revolution ===
Then , there was the October Revolution .
Two factions fought to rule over Russia .
The Mensheviks lost against the Bolsheviks .
The leader of the Bolsheviks was Vladimir Lenin ( 1870-1924 ) a Communist who followed the ideas of Karl Marx .
The new government asked the Germans for peace and signed a peace treaty called Brest-Litovsk with the Central Powers in March 1918 at the city of Brest-Litovsk .
The Germans and Russians stopped fighting .
This gave Germany land in Eastern Europe and the Baltic Sea .
== Aftermath ==
After the war , the Germans had to agree to the Treaty of Versailles .
Germany had to pay approximately 31.5 billion in reparations .
They also had to take responsibility for the war .
Part of the treaty said the countries of the world should come together to make an international organization to stop wars from happening .
This organization was called the League of Nations .
The United States Senate did not agree with this , even though it was the idea of the US president , Woodrow Wilson .
Woodrow Wilson tried to tell the American people that they should agree , but the United States never joined the League of Nations .
Problems with the Treaty in Germany would later lead to the World War II .
== Related pages ==
League of Nations Remembrance Day World War II == Notes ==
== References ==
== Other websites ==
World War 1 Letters The Internet 's Collection of World War One Mail .
World War 1 Atlas A day-by-day map of World War I A history of World War I in pictures , audio , and video The Heritage of the Great War , Netherlands World War I -Citizendium
