Apollo is a god in Greek mythology , and one of the Twelve Olympians .
He is the son of Zeus and Leto and the twin brother of Artemis .
He is the god of healing , medicine , archery , music , poetry and the sun .
He is the leader of the Muses .
He also is a god of prophecy , and his Oracle at Delphi is very important .
He also is the god of justice .
During the 5th century BC , Apollo became also known as the god of Sun , becoming one with the god Helios , and getting the name Phoebus .
He is shown as a young man , wearing a laurel wreath and playing the kithara ( lyre ) .
It is known as his symbol .
His other symbols include the raven .
== Myths about Apollo ==
Apollon or Apollo was one of the Twelve Olympians , the 12 most important gods in Greek mythology .
Because of this , there are many myths about him : === The Birth of Apollo ===
Apollo and his twin sister Artemis were the children of Zeus , the king of the Greek gods , and the goddess Leto .
When Leto became pregnant , Zeus already had a wife , the queen of the gods Hera .
Hera was angry that Zeus was having children with Leto , and cursed Leto so that she could not ever give birth to her children anywhere on the earth where the sun shone .
Hera then sent a serpent called Python to eat her .
Python chased Leto to the edge of the sea , where Leto swam to the island of Delos .
Python could not swim , however , and had to leave her alone .
The island of Delos was at that time just a big rock floating on the sea , not an island yet , so it was n't on the earth .
So Leto climbed under the shade of a palm tree and gave birth to her daughter Artemis , and then her son Apollo .
Delos then became Apollo 's and Artemis ' sacred land .
It varies from myth to myth what twin was born first .
=== Apollo and Delphi ===
When Apollo grew up , he went to his father Zeus and asked for a golden bow with arrows as bright and sharp as the sunshine .
Then he went looking for a place to build his temple .
He came to a spring that belonged to a nymph called Telephusa and tried to build his temple there , but Telephusa suggested he build his temple at Delphi instead , since there was already a shrine there to Themis , the goddess of telling the future .
Apollo went to Delphi but found out it was taken over by Python , the dragon who had tried to eat his mother .
He killed the Python with a hundred arrows and claimed Delphi as his temple .
He got two sailors to be his priests and then gave a girl the power of telling the future .
The girl became his priestess or oracle .
The little god Eros , the son of the love goddess Aphrodite , had watched Apollo kill Python and worshiped Apollo as his idol .
Apollo , however , was annoyed by Eros and insulted him .
Eros got angry and shot Apollo with his magic arrow , making him fall in love with a nymph named Daphne .
Daphne did n't love Apollo and shunned him .
Apollo chased her , and she turned herself into a laurel tree to escape him .
Apollo still loved her and made the laurel one of his symbols .
=== Apollo and Hermes ===
Apollo looked after the cattle of the sun-god Helios while Helios was driving the sun through the sky .
While Apollo was chasing Daphne , the mischievous baby god Hermes stole the cattle and confused Apollo by making the cattle walk backward as they left their pen .
When Apollo went looking for them , it looked like they had walked into the ranch instead of out .
Hermes also told a nearby man that he would make him rich if he told no one about what he saw Hermes do .
The man , Battos , told Apollo anyway and was later turned into stone by Hermes as punishment .
Apollo took Hermes in front of all the gods to be judged .
Hermes acted innocent , though , and finally convinced Apollo to forgive him by giving him the lyre .
Apollo loved this lyre so much that he not only let Hermes keep the cattle but also gave him the caduceus , a magic wand that could heal wounds and cause sleep .
Hermes tried the caduceus out on two dying snakes , who came back to life and curled around the wand for the rest of eternity .
Apollo , meanwhile , used his lyre to become the god of music and became the leader of the Muses , the nine goddesses of the arts .
== References ==
http :
