The National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) is an independent agency of the United States Federal Government that deals with space exploration and aeronautics , the operating and designing of planes .
NASA has had many successful missions , for example the ISS , and Apollo 11 , which put the first man on the Moon in 1969 .
NASA was started on July 29 , 1958 .
NASA 's motto is : For the Benefit of All .
The current Administrator of NASA is Jim Bridenstine since April 2018 .
== Founding and the Sputnik crisis ==
NASA was preceded by the House [ National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ] ] ( NACA ) .
NACA was a US federal agency founded on March 3 , 1915 to undertake , promote , and institutionalize aeronautical research .
On October 1 , 1958 the agency was dissolved , and its assets and personnel transferred to the newly created National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) .
NASA was founded to compete with the Soviet Union in the space race .
In the 1950s and 1960s there was a space race between the US and the Soviet Union - now called Russia .
The Soviets started first launching Sputnik 1 , the first object made by people to go into orbit , in October 1957 .
The Americans were worried by this .
It caused a crisis known as the Sputnik Crisis as the Americans feared the Russians might start building weapons in space .
This all happened at a time called the Cold War when the USA and the Soviet Union were always very close to war .
== Space flight programs ==
=== Project Mercury ( 1958–1963 ) === Originally NASA was very small with only four laboratories and around eighty people working there .
German engineers and scientists led by Wernher von Braun helped them build rockets .
They had helped build the V-2 missile in Germany during World War II and the Redstone missile for the US Army afterwards .
Their Army missile laboratory was transferred to NASA .
In 1960 they set up the Mercury project .
The Mercury Project space missions were designed by NASA , mostly to test if humans could survive in space .
After they proved it was possible for people to live in space they moved on .
On May 15th 1961 astronaut Alan Shepard became the first American in space .
Less than a year later , John Glenn became the first American to orbit or circle the Earth .
He did so in a spacecraft called Friendship 7 .
Once the Mercury Project proved that humans could live in space , the Gemini Project was started .
Less than a year after it began , the Apollo Program also began .
=== Project Gemini ( 1961–1966 ) === After the success of Mercury , NASA realized it had to start planning for its missions to the Moon .
The Gemini spacecraft was built for two men .
It was still small and cramped similar to the Mercury capsule , but allowed for more freedom of movement .
Project Gemini proved that two spacecraft could rendezvous ( meet and dock ) in space .
Neil Armstrong , the first man on the Moon , was also on the first Gemini flight to dock with another spacecraft in outer space .
The Gemini spacecraft did not dock with another spacecraft with people in it .
Instead , it docked with a rocket called Agena target vehicle .
The last few Gemini missions were science experiments and spacewalks designed to prepare for the Apollo Program , which would land human beings on the Moon .
=== Apollo program ( 1961–1972 ) === The Apollo program was started by President John F Kennedy in the 1960s .
The program was made of 16 missions designed to send a man to the Moon and return him safely back to Earth .
The first Apollo mission , Apollo 1 , ended in disaster when a fire in the command module killed all the astronauts on board .
The Apollo 8 and 10 missions went to the moon .
They tested equipment and took photos but did not land .
The project 's main success came in 1969 when Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the Moon as part of Apollo 11 .
The mission was a big success for NASA and over six million people watched it worldwide .
After Apollo 11 , six more Apollo flights went to the moon .
Five of them landed .
The one that did not land , Apollo 13 , had to abort its mission when an oxygen tank exploded in the spaceship .
Apollo 17 was the last mission to land on the Moon .
=== Skylab ( 1965–1979 ) === After Congress stopped the Moon landings , NASA needed a new direction .
Using a leftover Saturn V rocket , the giant rocket that sent men to the Moon , they created a space station that orbited above the Earth .
This space station was called Skylab .
Skylab was very big on the inside , even bigger than a small house .
Skylab was visited by Apollo spacecrafts .
There were three missions to Skylab .
Each of them carried important experiments .
The last crewed mission , Skylab 4 , spent 84 days , 1 hour , 15 minutes , 30 seconds , longer than any space mission had spent until 1977 .
Skylab broke up in the atmosphere in 1979 .
=== Apollo–Soyuz Test Project ( 1972–1975 ) === During the Space Race , the Soviets had designed their own spacecraft to fly to the Moon .
Their spacecraft was called Soyuz .
The Soviets never landed on the Moon , they had too many problems .
Instead , they started creating small space stations .
The Soyuz spacecraft is what they used to go to these space stations .
US and Soviet Union were part of the Cold War .
In order to make peace between Soviet Union and US , they decided they would dock an Apollo spacecraft to a Soyuz spacecraft in space .
After docking , the crews performed experiments and learned about each other 's cultures .
Apollo–Soyuz was the last flight of the Apollo spacecraft .
It has never been used since , and never will be .
=== Space Shuttle program ( 1972–2011 ) === In the 1980s and 1990s NASA began to concentrate on building Space Shuttles .
Four Shuttles were built in 1985 .
The first to launch was the Space Shuttle Columbia in April 12 , 1981 .
At this time the public began to lose interest in the space program and NASA faced budget cuts .
They had planned for the Space Shuttles to cost less as they could be used more than once .
But eventually it turned out the Space Shuttles were more expensive as building them in the first place cost more money than normal .
There were further problems for NASA after the Space Shuttle Challenger disintegrated in flight in 1986 , killing all seven of its astronauts .
The incident is known as the Challenger Disaster .
The Challenger Disaster forced NASA to think about the way they worked .
The entire Space Shuttle fleet was suspended for a year .
After that , NASA launched the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit .
Its most famous photo was the Hubble Deep Field .
In 2011 , NASA shut down the Space Shuttle program .
They were more expensive to use than other launch vehicles .
=== International Space Station ( 1993–present ) === In the early 1980s , NASA planned Space Station Freedom as a counterpart to the Soviet Salyut and Mir space stations .
It never left the drawing board and , with the end of the Soviet Union and the Cold War , it was cancelled .
The end of the Space Race prompted the U.S. administration officials to start negotiations with international partners Europe , Russia , Japan and Canada in the early 1990s in order to build the International Space Station .
This project was first announced in 1993 and was called Space Station Alpha .
It was planned to combine the proposed space stations of all participating space agencies : NASA 's Space Station Freedom , Russia 's Mir-2 ( the successor to the Mir Space Station , the core of which is now Zvezda ) and ESA 's Columbus that was planned to be a stand-alone spacelab .
=== Curiosity rover ( 2011–present ) === Curiosity is a car-sized rover .
It was made to explore the crater Gale on Mars .
Curiosity was launched from Cape Canaveral on November 26 , 2011 , at 15:02 UTC and landed on Aeolis Palus inside Gale on Mars on August 6 , 2012 , 05:17 UTC .
The Bradbury Landing site was less than 2.4 kilometres ( 1.5 miles ) from where the rover landed after a 560 million kilometres ( 350 million miles ) journey .
The goals of the rover include an investigation of the Martian climate and geology .
== NASA 's future == NASA is continuing operations include missions to the planets Mars , Saturn and Pluto .
Missions to Jupiter are also planned for the near future .
The New Horizons spacecraft flew past Jupiter in February 2007 , studying some of the planet 's moons .
On July 14 , 2015 the craft flew by Pluto , took high resolution pictures of the planet 's surface and analysed the chemical properties of its atmosphere .
NASA announced in 2004 that they plan to have a permanent Moon base by 2020 .
A senior NASA administrator also stated in 2007 that NASA aims to put a man on Mars by 2037 , in early 2010 , President Barack Obama cancelled the Constellation project that was aiming to have humans return to the moon 's surface by 2020 .
He said the project was behind schedule and lacking in innovation .
At the same time he cut back the amount of money NASA will be getting from the government in 2011 .
When President Barack Obama did this , he also worked with NASA to create the Space Launch System .
This , with commercial launch vehicles ( launch vehicles that are not owned by NASA ) , will take humans to the Moon and Mars .
== NASA Missions ==
NASA has launched over 500 missions in its 50-year history .
Over 150 missions had humans on board .
Such manned missions are the most expensive and make the most news but the majority of launches are for space exploration , science , and other purposes that do not need people .
NASA spacecraft such as Cassini-Huygens and the Voyager program have visited every planet in the Solar System .
Four NASA spacecraft have left the Solar System , Voyager 1 , Voyager 2 , Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 .
As of 2013 Voyager 1 is around 18,800,000,000 ( 18.8 billion ) kilometers away from Earth .
== Related pages ==
Administrators and Deputy Administrators of NASA Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Kennedy Space Center == Notes ==
== References ==
== Other websites ==
NASA.gov - official website NASA Television NASA Photos How NASA works NASA for Kids NASA Spaceflight news site
