Ibuprofen is a drug ( NSAID ) created by British chemist Stewart Adams .
It is used to stop pain , help reduce fevers , relieve arthritis pain , and acts as an inflammatory part .
Ibuprofen is used to relieve pain from various conditions such as headache , dental pain , menstrual cramps , muscle aches , or arthritis .
It is also used to reduce fever and to relieve minor aches and pain due to the common cold .
If you are treating a chronic condition such as arthritis , ask your doctor about treatments using other medications to treat your pain .
See also Warning section .
Check the ingredients on the label even if you have used the product before .
The manufacturer may have changed the ingredients .
Also , products with similar names may contain different ingredients meant for different purposes .
Taking the wrong product could harm you .
If you are taking the product , read all directions on the product package before taking this medication .
If your doctor has prescribed this medication , read the Medication Guide provided by your pharmacist before you start taking ibuprofen and each time you get a refill .
If you have any questions , ask your doctor or pharmacist .
Take this medication by mouth , usually every 4 to 6 hours with a full glass of water ( 8 milliliters ) unless your doctor directs you otherwise .
Do not lie down for at least 10 minutes after taking this drug .
If you have stomach upset while taking this medication , take it with food , milk , or an antacid .
The dosage is based on your medical condition and response to treatment .
To reduce your risk of stomach bleeding and other side effects , take this medication at the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible time .
Do not increase your dose or take this drug more often than directed by your doctor or the package label .
For ongoing conditions such as arthritis , continue taking this medication as directed by your doctor .
When ibuprofen is used by children , the dose is based on the child weight .
Read the package directions to find the proper dose for your child weight .
Consult the pharmacist or doctor if you have questions or if you need help choosing a nonprescription product .
For certain conditions ( such as arthritis ) , it may take up to two weeks of taking this drug regularly until you get the full benefit .
If you are taking this drug as needed ( not on a regular schedule ) , remember that pain medications work best if they are used as the first signs of pain occur .
If you wait until the pain has worsened , the medication may not work as well .
If your condition persists or worsens , or if you think you may have a serious medical problem , get medical help right away .
If you are using the nonprescription product to treat yourself or a child for fever or pain , consult the doctor right away if fever worsens or lasts more than 3 days , or if pain worsens or lasts more than 10 days .
== References ==
