The Milky Way is our home galaxy .
It contains over 200 billion stars , including our Milky Way has a diameter of about or light years , and is a barred spiral galaxy .
The idea that the Milky Way is made of stars goes back to the Ancient Greek philosopher Milky Way has three main parts : a disk , in which the Solar System resides , a bulge at the core , and an all encompassing halo .
Although the word disk suggest it is flat , the Milky Way is actually not quite flat .
It is slightly warped and galaxy belongs to the Local Group of three large galaxies and over 50 smaller galaxies .
The Milky Way is one of the largest galaxies in the group , second to the Andromeda Galaxy .
Milky Way closest neighbour is Canis Major Dwarf , which is about light years away from the Earth .
The Andromeda Galaxy moves towards the Milky Way Galaxy , and will meet it in about billion years .
Andromeda Galaxy moves with a speed of about kilometres per minute .
== Size ==
The stellar disk of the Milky Way Galaxy is approximately ( km ) in diameter , and is considered to be , on average , about 1000 light years is estimated to contain at least 200 billion stars and possibly up to 400 billion stars .
The figure depends on the number of very , or dwarf stars , which are hard to detect , especially more than 300 light years from our sun .
Therefore , present estimates of the total number are uncertain .
This can be compared to the one trillion ( 1012 ) stars of the neighbouring Andromeda stellar disc of the Milky Way does not have a sharp edge , a radius beyond which there are no stars .
Rather , the number of stars drops smoothly with distance from the centre of the Galaxy .
Beyond a radius of about light years , the number of stars drops much faster , for reasons that are not beyond the stellar disk is a much thicker disk of gas .
Recent observations indicate that the gaseous disk of the Milky Way has a thickness of around 12000 light the previously accepted value .
As a guide to the relative physical scale of the Milky Way , if the Solar System out to the orbit of Pluto were reduced to the size of a US quarter ( about an inch or 25 mm in diameter ) , the Milky Way would have a diameter of kilometers .
At 220 kilometers per second it takes the Solar System about 240 million years to complete one orbit of the Galaxy ( a galactic year ) Galactic halo extends outward , but is limited in size by the orbits of two Milky Way satellites , the Large and the Small Magellanic Clouds , whose closest approach is at about light years .
At this distance or beyond , the orbits of most halo objects would be disrupted by the Magellanic Clouds , and the objects would likely be ejected from the vicinity of the Milky Way .
== Galactic center ==
The galactic disc , which bulges outward at the galactic center , has a diameter of light exact distance from the Sun to the galactic center is debated .
The latest estimates give distances to the Galactic center of light of material around the galactic center shows that it has a compact object of very large mass .
The intense radio source named Sagittarius A , thought to mark the center of the Milky Way , is now confirmed to be a supermassive black hole .
Most galaxies are believed to have a supermassive black hole at their nature of the galaxy bar is also actively debated , with estimates for its and orientation spanning from light years ( short or a long bar ) and degrees .
Viewed from the Andromeda Galaxy , it would be the brightest feature of our own galaxy .
== Myth ==
In Greek mythology , Zeus places his son ( the baby Heracles ) whose mother was a mortal woman on Hera breast while she is sleeping so that the baby will drink her divine milk and become immortal .
However , Hera wakes up while she is breastfeeding the baby and realizes she is nursing a baby she does not know .
According to Greek mythology , she then pushes the baby away and a stream of her milk sprays the night sky , making a faint band of light known as the Milky Way .
== Related pages ==
Galaxy Local Group List of galaxies == References ==
